
Table of Contents
1. Disclaimer .................................................................................................................. 1
2. Welcome to ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE ............................................................. 2
2.1. What’s new in DELUXE? ................................................................................... 2
2.2. About SESSION GUITARIST – ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE ....................... 3
3. Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE ...................................................................... 4
3.1. Playing Melodies .............................................................................................. 4
3.2. Combining Melodies and Patterns ..................................................................... 5
3.3. Pattern Selection and Playback ......................................................................... 6
3.4. Playing Manual or Automatic Chords ................................................................. 7
3.4.1. The Voicing Generator and Auto Chords .................................................. 8
3.5. Playing Endings and Slides ............................................................................... 9
3.6. Controlling the Dynamics of the Performance ................................................... 10
3.7. Loading / Saving Sound Presets ...................................................................... 10
3.8. Locking Parameters When Loading Snapshots or Songs ................................... 11
3.9. Resetting the Round Robin Counter .................................................................. 11
3.10. Defining the Downbeat after Signature Changes ............................................. 12
4. The Inspector Panel .................................................................................................. 13
5. The Song Browser .................................................................................................... 15
6. The Pattern Browser ................................................................................................. 16
7. The Guitar Settings Page .......................................................................................... 19
8. The Amps & FX Page ............................................................................................... 21
9. The Playback Page ................................................................................................... 24
10. Tips and Tricks ....................................................................................................... 26
10.1. Use the Melody Instrument to enhance the Pattern Playback ........................... 26
10.2. Vary the number of played notes in Arpeggio Patterns ..................................... 26
10.3. Create Natural Transitions between Chords .................................................... 26
10.4. Combine Patterns Creatively ......................................................................... 27
10.5. Create Custom Groove Variations .................................................................. 27
10.6. Use Authentic Humanization .......................................................................... 28
10.7. Use the Impact Slider as a “Drama Controller” ................................................ 28
10.8. Use Multiple Session Guitarist Instruments Simultaneously ............................. 28
11. Credits ................................................................................................................... 29
Disclaimer
1. DISCLAIMER
The information in this document is subject to change without notice and does not represent a
commitment on the part of Native Instruments GmbH. The software described by this document is
subject to a License Agreement and may not be copied to other media. No part of this publication
may be copied, reproduced or otherwise transmitted or recorded, for any purpose, without prior
written permission by Native Instruments GmbH, hereinafter referred to as Native Instruments.
“Native Instruments”, “NI” and associated logos are (registered) trademarks of Native Instruments
GmbH.
Mac, macOS, GarageBand, Logic and iTunes are registered trademarks of Apple Inc., registered
in the U.S. and other countries.
Windows and DirectSound are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States
and/or other countries.
All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners and use of them does not imply
any affiliation with or endorsement by them.
Document authored by: Daniel Scholz
Software version: 1.0 (03/2020)
1
Welcome to ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
2. WELCOME TO ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
Thank you for purchasing SESSION GUITARIST – ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE, an electric
guitar sample library powered by KONTAKT. This document will provide you with instructions and
advice on how to use the library, as well as some additional information.
We hope that you will be truly inspired by using SESSION GUITARIST – ELECTRIC SUNBURST
DELUXE
2.1. What’s new in DELUXE?
ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE is the first installment of the SESSION GUITARIST series allow-
ing you to play melodies on an electric guitar. The DELUXE version contains the entire pattern li-
brary of the original ELECTRIC SUNBURST library. In addition to the added melody feature, the
pattern library has been expanded, featuring 27 new strumming patterns and an advanced picking
engine with 28 new arpeggio patterns. We also added a selection of reversed patterns, which add
an entirely new sonic palette to ELECTRIC SUNBURST’S library. The total number of included
patterns is 237, covering a wide selection of musical genres and playing styles, such as pre-recor-
ded riffs, strumming and picking of arpeggiated chords in open, muted and flageolet playing styles.
The melody instrument provides open, muted, flageolet and tremolo articulations. Each articulation
can be played with fingers or plectrum. An optional monophonic mode makes it possible to play
single-note melodies with unprecedented realism. Advanced features like recorded slides, realistic
emulation of fret noises and the automatic triggering of hammer-ons and pull-offs lead to authen-
tic-sounding results in no time.
The pitch bend wheel, which controls the impact/velocity of patterns, doubles as a pitch bend con-
trol in melody mode. When the pitch bend type is set to All, pitch bend affects all played notes. If
one of the other entries is selected, only specific notes (lowest, highest, softest, loudest, latest
note) in a voicing are affected. This enables the emulation of specific playing techniques on guitars
where only some of the played strings are bent and others, e.g. open strings retain their original
pitch. The modwheel controls the vibrato of both patterns and melodies. We have added different
vibrato styles (slow, medium, fast) as presets next to the vibrato control.
ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE also provides a selection of new sound presets featuring the
new Replika Delay, a new algorithmic Reverb unit, as well as the new, meticulously emulated
stomp boxes Choral (Chorus), Flair (Flanger) and Phasis (Phaser).
The guitar settings page contains a new control to continuously adjust the decay time of muted
single notes. To adjust the decay in real-time, right-click to assign a MIDI controller.
The voicing generator module has been updated and provides new voicings with pedal points.
This feature was first introduced with PICKED ACOUSTIC and provides a convenient way to play
chord progressions with voicings resembling open tunings. To use this feature, select a voicing
with an asterisk next to one or multiple intervals listed in the voicing menu. This feature is only
available for selected patterns.
2
Welcome to ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
By default, patterns are loaded with the first voicing being selected in the voicing generator. This
provides a quick way to hear the pattern with suitable voicing. If you generally prefer to play voic-
ings manually instead of relying on the voicing generator, you can permanently deactivate the voic-
ing feature for all patterns by selecting OFF in the voicing drop-down menu. This will deactivate
the voicing generator, even when loading different patterns or songs. To reactivate, select one of
the preset voicings in the menu.
2.2. About SESSION GUITARIST – ELECTRIC SUNBURST DE-
LUXE
ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE combines a pattern-based guitar library with a sophisticated
multisample set, designed to deliver authentic-sounding melodies, riffs, arpeggio and strumming
patterns for songwriting and music production. Its samples originate from a carefully selected in-
stance of the iconic single-cutaway, double humbucker electric guitar. The instrument was recor-
ded through Universal Audio Solo 610 preamps, whose bold transient reproduction and tube satu-
ration prepared the guitar for further effects processing with virtual amps, cabinets and effects. To
enable you to freely combine the two pickups, the individual signals were routed through two sepa-
rate outputs and recorded through two separate preamps. In addition, for greater sonic variability,
a small membrane condenser microphone was mounted directly above the strings to capture the
sound of the plectrum hitting the strings.
The signals were then converted by the SPL Madison analog-to-digital converter, and fed into an
RME MADIface XT via MADI. Thanks to the superior tonal balance of the instrument, it was not
necessary to add further effects like EQ or compression. When playing the instrument through
high quality guitar amp and cabinet emulations, the sound will be as true to the original as techni-
cally possible.
Patterns and sample content were performed live by professional studio guitarists Andreas Dom-
bert, Joschi Joachimsthaler and Christoph Bernewitz. The patterns are grouped in song presets,
containing 4–6 patterns that go together well, as well as a matching sound preset. You can select
patterns via keyswitches and play them as chords on your MIDI keyboard. Pattern playback will
always stay in sync with your host project.
Regarding sound options, ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE delivers the full flexibility of the origi-
nal instrument: selection and volume control of the included pickups, individual tone control per
pickup, and a microphone signal that can be added to enhance the pickup signals. These com-
bined source signals are routed through a signal chain of up to seven audio effects, comprising a
selection of guitar effects pedals, amps, and cabinets, as well as professional-grade reverb and
delay units. Like the other products in the SESSION GUITARIST series, ELECTRIC SUNBURST
DELUXE provides a true doubling mode. Depending on the selected pattern, it can be played over
a pitch range of almost four octaves.
The key feature of ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE is its revolutionary playback engine. You can
seamlessly switch between different patterns, and also alter the dynamics in real-time, thus creat-
ing true-to-life musical performances. In contrast to most pattern-based instruments, the number of
available chord types is virtually endless. Because all the nuances of the original performance,
such as exact timing and dynamics, have been preserved, you will notice that the instrument feels
very natural and organic. All of the integrated patterns can be played over a wide tempo range in
outstanding sound quality.
3
Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
3. USING ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
Just like in the PICKED ACOUSTIC product, the new melody feature is provided in a separate
Melody instrument. While the regular Electric Sunburst Deluxe.nki is designed for the conven-
ient playback of patterns, the melody instrument allows you to play your own melodies and com-
bine melodies and patterns within a single instrument.
The ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE instruments are designed to be played using a MIDI key-
board. The patterns are triggered and selected via MIDI, allowing for fast arranging.
Patterns will automatically sync to the master or host tempo. The patterns in this library can be
played at any tempo between ca. 60-65 bpm and up to 160 bpm and even above. Since there is
no time-stretching involved in the process, you will always hear the patterns in the highest possible
quality.
The patterns are based on actual recordings by a professional studio guitarist, so
they sound best in the typical tempo range preferred by most guitarists.
KONTAKT’s on-screen keyboard, presenting the current keyboard layout.
On KONTAKT’s on-screen keyboard, all relevant keys and key ranges are color-coded: keyswitch-
es for melody articulations (yellow), patterns (red), endings (purple), and slide (green). Melodies or
chords can be played in the blue key range. For an alternative overview, you can open the Map-
ping Panel by clicking the small keyboard icon in the bottom right corner of the instrument.
The Mapping panel, which presents a more detailed graphical overview of the keyboard layout.
3.1. Playing Melodies
After loading the Melody instrument up, you are presented with a melody section on the left and a
pattern section on the right. If the melody section is selected, you will not hear the notes you play
sequenced as a pattern, but as you actually play them, much like on a piano. This way, you can
play any melody you can think of with ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE.
4
Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
Melody and pattern sections in the melody instrument.
▪ To change melody articulations, use the keyswitches from C1 to D#1 to select between open,
muted, flageolet and tremolo styles.
▪ Plectrum / Finger switch: Below the articulation keyswitches, you can choose to play all of the
above articulations with either Plectrum or Fingers.
▪ Poly / Mono switch: The monophonic mode creates smooth transitions between notes, which
sounds best when playing solo melodies. The polyphonic mode enables you to play multiple notes
at the same time. This mode is perfect for playing sustained chords or for playing your own arpeg-
gios. However, the transitions between single notes sound best in monophonic mode. In both
modes, you can use the sustain pedal just like on a piano.
▪ To apply vibrato or pitch bend, use the pitch and modwheel of your keyboard. When playing
patterns, the pitch wheel doubles as an Impact controller, modifying the velocity and accent inten-
sity of performed patterns (for more information, see Controlling the Dynamics of the Perform-
ance ). From the Vibrato drop-down menu, you can choose between three different vibrato styles.
The bend drop-down menu offers the standard pitchbend mode (All), as well as a unique mode
where only specific notes (lowest, highest, softest, loudest, latest note) in a voicing are affected by
the pitch bend. This enables the emulation of specific playing techniques on guitars where only
some of the played strings are bent and others, e.g., open strings retain their original pitch.
When playing adjacent open notes, hammer-on and pull-off samples are added au-
tomatically if the velocity of the following note is significantly softer than the one pre-
viously played. This works only for overlapping (legato) notes up to an interval of a
minor third.
3.2. Combining Melodies and Patterns
The melody instrument provides two different modes, namely the Melody mode and the Pattern
mode. By default, it is in Melody mode.
5
Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
▪ To switch from melody to pattern, hold down one of the pattern keyswitches from E1 to G1
with your left hand, while playing notes with your right hand. The instrument will temporarily per-
form those notes as a pattern. If a voicing (see The Voicing Generator and Auto Chords) is selec-
ted for a pattern, triggering its keyswitch will cause the pattern to be played back using the notes
contained in the selected voicing rather than the very notes you play.
▪ To switch back to melody, release the pattern keyswitch with your left hand. If you still hold
notes in your right hand at that moment, the instrument tries to sequence one more note that
would have followed had you continued with the pattern playback. For example, if you release the
pattern keyswitch shortly before the next downbeat while still holding notes with your right hand,
the instrument will switch back to melody mode with one last note onto that downbeat.
▪ To play patterns instead of melodies by default: If you are mainly intending to use the melody
instrument to play back patterns, you can change the default mode from Melody to Pattern on the
Playback page (see The Playback Page). When Pattern is selected as the default mode, holding
down one of the Melody keyswitches (C1 to D#1) will engage the melody mode temporarily.
To achieve musically convincing results, it is advisable to use the instrument within
your sequencer and to play along with its metronome.
The included pattern library is identical in the pattern instrument and the melody in-
strument, and the procedures to load, modify and play back patterns are similar.
However, to accommodate the melody articulations, the number of pattern slots has
been reduced from eight to four in the melody instrument.
3.3. Pattern Selection and Playback
The following section describes the pattern instrument. While most of the information also applies
to the melody instrument, please refer to Playing Melodies and Combining Melodies and Patterns
for detailed information about the features which are specific to the melody instrument.
▪ To select a pattern, press the corresponding keyswitch MIDI note or click on the pattern you
wish to use.
▪ To play a pattern, play chords on your MIDI keyboard. After releasing the keys, playback will be
stopped within a specified note duration (see the Latch Mode section in The Playback Page). By
default, each pattern comes with a set of suitable voicings. To deactivate the voicing feature,
choose As played in the voicing drop-down menu for the respective pattern slot. If you want to
permanently stick to the As played mode for all patterns and songs, select OFF from the menu.
▪ To stop the playback, either trigger one of the three endings (see section Playing Endings and
Slides) via keyswitch or release all keys on your keyboard.
▪ To load a different pattern into a slot, click on the magnifier icon in the current slot. This will
open the pattern browser (see section The Pattern Browser).
▪ To cycle through all available patterns within one slot, click on the little left or right arrow but-
tons in the current slot.
6
Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
▪ To remove a pattern (i.e. clear a slot), [Alt] + click on a slot.
It is always best to play chord or pattern changes a little before the beat, to give the
playback engine time to anticipate the transition. This way, the engine has enough
time to add fret noises and the transition will sound more natural. As the perform-
ance is bound to the metronome of the sequencer, the timing of incoming MIDI
events has no effect on the timing of the performance. For more information, read
Tips and Tricks.
If available, “Chase Events” should be enabled in your DAW settings; this will ensure
that the engine gets proper note information on sequencer start or cycle jumps.
3.4. Playing Manual or Automatic Chords
ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE offers three different pattern types and each type reacts to in-
coming MIDI notes in a slightly different manner:
▪ Strumming patterns: Strumming patterns are based on recorded loops. If you play more than
one single note, additional single notes will be added on top of the originally recorded loop. For
best results, do not play too many notes at a time.
▪ Arpeggio patterns: When playing arpeggio patterns, the playback engine analyzes the incoming
or generated chord and allocates the individual notes to different strings of the guitar. The more
notes you press on the keyboard, the more sophisticated the resulting arpeggio pattern will sound.
Therefore, playing up to six notes at a time can lead to interesting variations. Depending on the
selected pattern, several notes of a voicing will be performed as hammer-ons and pull-offs.
▪ Riffs: Riffs come as pre-recorded performances. However, they adapt to incoming chords by
chromatically adjusting individual notes of the riff to the incoming chord. For example, if the preset
riff contains minor thirds and sevenths, pressing a Cma7 voicing on the keyboard will cause the
playback engine to adapt the pattern such that the minor third is replaced by a major third and the
minor seventh is replaced by a major seventh.
ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE recognizes all intervals, as well as a great variety of chords, in-
cluding major, minor, no-third, diminished, augmented, half-diminished, various suspensions, op-
tions, and alterations, and even slash chords (e.g. C/E, D/C, Dmi7/F, Ami/E, etc.). You can also
hold a chord or an interval with your left hand while playing a melody on top with your right hand,
or the other way round: say you hold the fifth interval in your right hand while you play different
bass notes in your left hand, which is especially well suited for the arpeggio patterns. Generally,
the instrument tries to play everything in the very pitch range you press it. This leads to a virtually
endless number of available chords and voicings.
7
Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
The chord detection engine does not like overlapping notes, because an overlap
would technically mean that two different chords exist at the same time. To avoid
those overlaps, fully release a chord, or some notes of it, shortly before you play
new ones.
When playing arpeggio patterns, you can trigger slides between different chords or
voicings by hard pressing the newly added keys: The next suitable note of an arpeg-
gio pattern will start with a slide if it is being played with a velocity greater than 110.
To use slides when playing melodies, hold down the B1 keyswitch while playing mel-
ody notes.
3.4.1. The Voicing Generator and Auto Chords
If you are less familiar with playing typical guitar voicings on a piano or keyboard, you have two
additional options: Use the integrated voicing generator and/or activate the Auto Chords mode.
▪ To enable or disable the voicing generator, select a pattern, and then click on the Voicing
drop-down menu.
Choose from one of five included voicing presets for the selected pattern. The number of notes
contained in the voicing may affect the rhythmical structure of the pattern. If you press only one
single key, you will hear the unaltered voicing preset. If you press thirds, sixths, sevenths and/or
other options, the voicing preset will be adapted accordingly. This way, you can easily convert a
major to a minor chord or vice versa. To deactivate the voicing generator, choose As played. The
voicing will then be an exact representation of the incoming MIDI notes.
▪ To take full control of your voicings, disable the voicing generator by selecting As played and
also disable the auto chords mode (see below). If you want to permanently stick to the As played
mode for all patterns and songs, select OFF from the menu.
▪ To enable or disable the Auto Chords mode, click on the little power button next to the Auto
Chords button. The Auto Chords mode will always be combined with the voicing generator and
provides the most basic chords (major and minor as well as some options), auto-mapped and au-
to-transposed on the white keys.
The Auto Chords Panel with the key set to G major. Therefore, the root pitch G is map-
ped to the original C key; all other pitches are mapped (transposed) consequently.
8
Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
▪ To show or hide the Auto Chords Panel, click on the Auto Chords button.
▪ To set the key of your song, select the key and mode from the drop-down menus. This will
transpose/shift the chord layout such that, in case of a major key, the root pitch will always be as-
signed to the original C key; in case of a minor key, the root pitch will always be mapped to the
original A key.
▪ To play chords in the Auto Chords mode, simply play a single white key anywhere in the blue
chord range (see keyboard layout of section Pattern Selection and Playback). This will play the
chord labeled on that key. In other words, no matter which key and mode you choose, you can
always play the seven diatonic pitches (plus the diminished seventh pitch) with the white keys from
C to B (plus the B flat key, which is represented as a white key as well).
▪ To add options or suspensions, click, or play and hold, any of the labeled black keys. To re-
move an option or suspension, click the corresponding key again, or release that key on your MIDI
keyboard.
▪ To exclude the Auto Chords settings from Songs or snapshots, click the lock icon in the top
left corner of the Auto Chords Panel (see section Locking Parameters When Loading Snapshots or
Songs).
The intervals contained in a voicing are listed in the voicing drop-down menu. An as-
terisk (*) next to an interval means that this interval is defined relative to the key of
the song, as defined in the auto chords panel, rather than relative to the root note of
a chord. For example, if D major is selected in the auto chords panel and a voicing
contains *octave, a high d will always sound, no matter which chord is played. This
feature emulates open strings in open guitar tunings like open C or DADGAD.
Although only one octave is displayed in the Auto Chords Panel, you can play the
full range of the instrument even in Auto Chords mode. However, the most powerful
mode is the standard chord mode (disable auto chords, disable voicings), where
chords, intervals, options, or tensions are played on the very pitches you press on
the keyboard.
3.5. Playing Endings and Slides
In addition to the actual patterns, ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE provides a variety of endings,
as well as slides and percussive sounds. The corresponding sets of keys are marked purple and
green on the KONTAKT on-screen keyboard. The table below describes the functionality of each
keyswitch for both the pattern instrument and the melody instrument:
9
Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
G#1 Long ending A1 Pattern Instrument Melody Instrument
Slide up: End sounding notes with an upward slide. If there are no
sounding notes, you will hear a regular slide. The speed of the slide
depends on the incoming velocity.
Slide down: End sounding notes with a downward slide. If there are
no sounding notes, you will hear a regular slide. The speed of the
slide depends on the incoming velocity.
Bb1 B1 Slide down: End sounding notes with a
downward slide. If there are no sound-
ing notes, a long ending will be played
and the slide will sound only when re-
leasing the key.
Mute strings → Hit guitar body with
knuckles → Slap strings with thumb
Pickup slide down Slide modifier: Hold this key to start melody notes with a slide. If the
previous note was lower, you will hear an upward slide, and vice
versa.
3.6. Controlling the Dynamics of the Performance
The patterns included in ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE ignore the velocity information coming
from your MIDI keyboard or host software/DAW. Instead, you can continuously control the dynam-
ics of the performance with the impact slider. As the melody instrument is velocity-sensitive while
in melody mode, the pitch bend wheel doubles as a pitch bend controller when playing melodies.
The Impact feature
Use your MIDI keyboard’s pitch wheel to control the Impact/pitch bend. It works as a bi-polar con-
trol to increase or decrease the playing intensity of the guitarist. The neutral default position is the
center position which can also be recalled via [Cmd] + click.
The Impact feature can be used to smoothen transitions between patterns with dif-
fering overall dynamics.
While the velocity coming from your keyboard doesn’t affect the dynamics of the per-
formance, you can use it to trigger slide transitions when playing arpeggio patterns.
When playing a chord change, try hitting a chord with a velocity greater than 110. A
slide transition will be added at the next suitable position.
3.7. Loading / Saving Sound Presets
With ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE, you can easily customize the sound. Each sound preset
includes all parameters of the Guitar Settings page as well as the Amps & FX page (see chapter
The Guitar Settings Page and The Amps & FX Page. You can load sound presets from the Sound
Preset drop-down menu in the top right corner of the instrument.
10
Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
The Sound Preset box in the top right corner of the instrument
▪ To load a factory or user sound preset, either
– select a preset from the drop-down menu, or
– cycle through all presets by clicking the little left and right arrow buttons.
▪ To save a new user sound preset, enter a preset name into the field and click on the floppy disk
icon. This will store the current sound settings (see chapter The Guitar Settings Page), including
the Voicing and Impact slider positions, into a new user preset.
▪ To overwrite a user sound preset, click on the floppy-disk icon again, after you've changed
sound settings, without changing the preset name itself.
▪ To delete a user sound preset, select it from the drop-down menu, then click the circular Delete
button.
▪ Linking sound presets to Song presets: If the Link to Song switch is enabled, selecting a
song preset (see section The Song Browser) will also load its corresponding sound preset. Dese-
lect to change songs without altering your guitar and effects settings.
3.8. Locking Parameters When Loading Snapshots or Songs
Normally, when you load snapshots or songs (see section The Song Browser) of the instrument,
all parameters will be set accordingly. Therefore, snapshots and songs are stored and recalled
globally. To prevent the Playback and/or Auto Chords parameters from being changed by loading
snapshots or songs, click the lock icon on the Playback tab.
If the Playback parameters are locked, they will not be changed by snapshots or songs
3.9. Resetting the Round Robin Counter
To enhance the realism of Electric Sunburst Deluxe, the entire sample content employs a method
which is called “Round Robin”: Each sample was recorded multiple times and if the same pitch is
being played with the same velocity multiple times in a row, Electric Sunburst Deluxe automatically
alternates between those different recorded samples of a given pitch and velocity. These varia-
tions are called “Round Robins”. The result is repetitions that sound less mechanical and more like
a performance by a real musician, as the tone varies ever so slightly. As the instrument is automat-
ically cycling through the different Round Robins, the performance will slightly differ each time
you’re playing it back in your sequencer.
While this is beneficial to the overall realism, you might find that a certain Round Robin sample
matches the required phrase better than another. You can reset the Round Robin counter by send-
ing continuous controller 3 (CC#3) to the instrument at the beginning of a song section. This way,
you will be hearing the exact same samples every time the section is being played back.
11
Using ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE
When exporting/bouncing your song, placing a CC#3 value at the beginning of your
arrangement will lead to a deterministic result: Each bounce will be using the exact
same samples, rather than a random constellation of Round Robins.
3.10. Defining the Downbeat after Signature Changes
Since there is no way for the instrument to recognize signature changes or insertions of half a bar
etc., present in your DAW session, its pattern playback would get out of sync in those cases. To
solve this problem, you can use the global transport offset feature to compensate for a change of
signature or bar length during playback.
→ To define a global transport offset in ticks, send MIDI CC#111.
The value you send (ranging from 0 to 127) will be multiplied by 80 ticks and added as an offset to
the host transport. 80 Ticks is the length of a 32th triplet, which is the greatest common divisor for
all note values available in the instrument. Twelve 32th triplets equal a quarter note. Therefore, to
insert half a 4/4th bar (i.e. shift the playback by two quarters or 2 × 12 32th triplets), you would
need to send MIDI CC#111 with value 24, etc.
The following table shows typical values needed for common offsets:
Offset CC#111 value
No offset 0
One quarter 12
Two quarters 24
Three quarters 36
Four quarters (= one 4/4 bar) 48
Five quarters 60
Six quarters 72
Seven quarters 84
Two 4/4 bars (= no offset) 96
Minus one quarter 84
Minus two quarters 72
Minus three quarters 60
One eighth note 6
One eighth triplet 4
12
The Inspector Panel
4. THE INSPECTOR PANEL
The Inspector Panel provides access to various parameters that will modify the length, start posi-
tion, volume and tempo of any pattern. The values of the Inspector Panel will always refer to the
selected pattern. In other words, if you select a different pattern, the Inspector Panel will adapt its
content according to the new pattern.
To show or hide the Inspector Panel, click on the button with the wrench icon.
The Inspector Panel
▪ Shift: Edit this value to shift the selected pattern's start (entry) position. Alternatively, you can
drag the pattern's rhythm display left or right.
▪ End: Edit this value to reduce the selected pattern's length so that it will loop earlier. Alternatively,
you can drag the terminating flag left or right.
You can use the End Step feature very creatively. For example, you can trim a 4/4
signature pattern by eight 16th snippets, so that it will perfectly fit a 3/4 signature.
You can also trim any pattern to odd signatures, such as 5/8 or 7/8. Combined with
the Start Shift feature, you have very powerful tools to create whole new patterns
and feels (e.g. start-shift a constant eighths pattern from on-beats to off-beats, etc.).
Be creative!
▪ Tempo: With the three tempo choices in the drop-down menu, you can switch the selected pat-
tern's tempo from normal (1:1) to half time (1/2) or double time (×2). Please note that there is also
a global time scaling feature on the Playback page (see The Playback Page). Its tempo factor will
be multiplied by each pattern's individual tempo factor.
▪ Style (available for arpeggio patterns only): From this drop-down menu, you can select three dif-
ferent playing techniques: open, muted and flageolet, each played with fingers and plectrum. For
some of the patterns, you can also choose a pre-defined mixture of them (mixed).
▪ Fret Pos (available for arpeggio patterns only): Change this value to make the virtual guitarist
play in higher fret positions, which typically results in a more mellow tone.
▪ Vol: Change this value to adjust the volume of the selected pattern, ranging from -24 dB up to
+24 dB in 0.1 dB increments.
13
The Inspector Panel
▪ Voicing: Choose from one of five included voicing presets for the selected pattern. The number
of notes contained in the voicing may affect the rhythmical structure of the pattern. If you press
only one single key, you will hear the unaltered voicing preset. If you press thirds, sixths, sevenths
and/or other options, the voicing preset will be adapted accordingly. This way, you can easily con-
vert a major to a minor chord or vice versa. To deactivate the voicing generator, choose As
played. The voicing will then be an exact representation of the incoming MIDI notes. If you want to
permanently stick to the As played mode for all patterns and songs, select OFF from the menu.
With slow host tempos, switching a pattern to half time may not work if the actual
relative tempo falls below the limit of ca. 65 bpm.
14
The Song Browser
5. THE SONG BROWSER
In ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE, a Song is a preset that contains up to eight related patterns
along with a factory sound preset (see section Loading / Saving Sound Presets) as well as some
settings of the Playback page (see The Playback Page). The patterns contained in a Song are loa-
ded into the pattern slots.
If you want songs to apply their recommended sound settings, activate the Link to
Song feature in the top right box. If you deactivate this feature, the current sound
settings won't be changed when you load a song.
To browse songs and then load a Song:
1. Click on the current song name; this will open the Song Browser.
2. Use the three attribute buttons at the top of the browser to refine the list of displayed Songs
by including or excluding different signatures. To show all Songs, deselect all attribute but-
tons.
3. To load a Song, double-click its name or click on the tick button. (If you wish to exit the Song
Browser without changing anything, click on the X button instead).
Alternatively, you can cycle through the included Songs, without entering the Song
Browser, by clicking on the triangular arrows to the left and right of the current Song
name.
15
The Pattern Browser
6. THE PATTERN BROWSER
Since a preset Song may not meet your exact needs, you may wish to change a slot's pattern, or
load additional patterns into specific slots.
Clicking the magnifying glass icon will open the Pattern Browser
The top area of the Pattern Browser holds a series of buttons that you can use to refine your
search, including a Rhythm Search strip, which is a very powerful tool for finding patterns that
match your custom rhythm. The body of the Pattern Browser contains a list of all patterns match-
ing the current search criteria. If the list is too long to fit the screen, you can scroll through the list
by dragging the scroll handle on the right up or down.
To avoid misconceptions: The Rhythm Search strip is merely a tool to find pre-recor-
ded patterns in the pattern library. It is technically impossible to create your own pat-
terns by entering a certain rhythm, so, despite its look, the Rhythm Search strip
should not be confused with a step sequencer.
• To search a pattern by attributes (and not by rhythm), make sure the Rhythm Search strip is
cleared. If it is not, click the Clear button next to the strip. Then refine your search by selecting
any of the attributes, such as Strum, Arpeggio, 4/4, etc. If you want to bypass a category (such
as Open/Muted/Mixed), deselect all attributes of that category. Consequently, you would need
to deselect all attributes to display all recorded patterns.
• To search a pattern by attributes and rhythm, first, select/deselect the desired attributes as
described above. Then, enter a rhythm on a 16ths note basis into the Rhythm Search strip.
With each new rhythm snippet that you enter, the pattern list will be refreshed in real-time, sor-
ted by the similarity of the desired rhythm to the rhythm of all patterns available in the library, in
descending order.
There is a powerful shortcut feature to quickly enter a repeating pattern into the
Rhythm Search strip: enter the beginning of the pattern and then [Alt] + click on the
position of the first repetition. Furthermore, if you [Alt] + click on the first snippet, all
other snippets will be activated/deactivated.
16
The Pattern Browser
• To 'tap in' a desired rhythm: first press the Record button and hear the metronome count-in.
Then start playing a rhythm on your MIDI keyboard or click on the 'Tap' button. You can start at
any time, so you can also start with a pickup beat. After 2 bars the recording will automatically
stop, and the search results will be listed.
The rhythm search algorithm is very powerful. It will compare the rhythm defined in the Rhythm
Search strip not only to the rhythm of the other patterns from start but also from any possible shif-
ted starting position. This way, patterns with specific start shift offsets might be revealed as musi-
cally matching-patterns which otherwise would simply be overlooked. If the perfect start shift offset
is different from 0, the value is appended to the pattern name. Upon loading a pattern, that offset
will automatically be applied and entered into the Inspector Panel (see section The Inspector Pan-
el Also, the Rhythm Search algorithm will rate accents higher than non-accentuated snippets. So,
if you're searching for accents following a certain rhythm, try entering the accents only.
If you cannot find a desired rhythm straight away, chances are that you can create
that particular rhythm by separately searching for the first and second half of the
rhythm of a desired pattern, loading the two halves into two different slots and com-
bining them during playback. Alternatively, you can load the same pattern into two
different slots and adjust the Start Shift of one of them, in order to shift accents to
the desired positions.
• To search for patterns similar to the selected one, you would need to search for patterns
with a rhythm similar to the selected pattern's rhythm. Instead of entering and copying the
rhythm manually, you can simply transfer the rhythm of the selected pattern into the Rhythm
Search strip by clicking on the Similar button.
This will start a search and put the selected pattern at the very top of the listed results, since
that pattern matches its own rhythm a 100 percent, of course. Rhythmically similar patterns will
be listed subsequently.
• To play a preview of a pattern, click on any of the listed patterns. This will also display the
pattern's rhythm structure in the second strip. The preview playback will sync to the host tempo
and transport position if the transport is running. However, only one selectable chord and pitch
can be previewed; incoming MIDI chords will be ignored.
• To stop the preview playback, simply click on the playing pattern again or, if the host trans-
port is running, stop it.
• To change the preview chord, select a pitch and a chord type in the top drop-down menus or
value dragger.
• To load a pattern, simply double-click the pattern or click the tick button. (If you want to cancel
the process, click the X button instead.)
17
The Pattern Browser
• To load a pattern to a different slot than the currently selected one, choose one of the eight
available pattern slots from the drop-down menu in the upper right corner. Confirm by clicking
the tick button, or double-click the respective pattern.
The selected pattern will now be loaded into the selected slot; a previous pattern of that slot will
be replaced. The pattern browser will be closed.
18
The Guitar Settings Page
7. THE GUITAR SETTINGS PAGE
Click on the Guitar Settings tab (at the bottom of the instrument) to display the Guitar Settings
page. This page provides controls that you can use to adjust the sound of the guitar itself, whereas
the Amps & FX page provides virtual effects, such as amplifiers, EQ or reverb. This page is divi-
ded into several sections, each of which is described below.
The Guitar Settings Page
▪ Pickup selector: Use the pickup selector switch to choose either the bridge pickup, neck pickup,
or a combination of both pickups. The bridge pickup provides a brighter sound with a stronger at-
tack, while the neck pickup sounds softer.
▪ Volume and Tone controls: Use these controls to adjust the volume and brightness of each
pickup individually.
▪ Mic signal: In addition to the two pickup signals, you can dial in the acoustic signal of a micro-
phone which was mounted directly above the strings. The pickup signals and the mic signal are
mixed down to a single bus, and are sent to the sound processors found on the Amps & FX page
for further processing.
To save memory, make sure to deactivate unused pickup and microphone signals in-
stead of only turning their volume knob down, as each active signal requires a share
of your computer’s memory.
▪ Doubling: When this button is activated, you will hear two separate guitars playing in unison, one
on the left, and one on the right. This creates a very wide stereo image.
19
The Guitar Settings Page
▪ Muted Notes: You can set the decay time of muted single notes by adjusting the Decay control.
To adjust the decay in real-time, right-click to assign a MIDI controller to this knob. This way, it is
possible to emulate continuous progressions from very short notes to a gradually longer decay or
vice versa.
▪ Velocity Reduction (melody instrument): With this control, you can limit the playable velocity
range that applies both for melodies and arpeggio patterns. With the knob turned fully left, you
have the guitar’s full dynamic range at your fingertips, while at the maximum right position, a more
narrow dynamic range is achieved. It is important to note that the compression applies to the ve-
locity level, not the audio level.
▪ Fret Noise: Use this knob to adjust the volume of fret noises, which are automatically added
upon changing chords.
▪ Noise Floor: Use this knob to raise the noise floor. The noise floor is switched off while the in-
strument is not playing.
▪ Tuning: Use this knob to detune the guitar.
Moderate levels of noise, detune, fret noises, and a little dose of mic signal can help
add realism, and create a more “tangible” guitar sound.
If you prefer to use external amp simulations instead of using the effects provided on
the Amps & FX page (The Amps & FX Page), keep in mind that stereo doubling re-
quires two individual signal chains, i.e. one amp simulation for the left output chan-
nel and another one for the right output channel. If in doubt, listen to the stereo
width: If the stereo doubled signal collapses to mono when applying external effects,
the signal path is not “true stereo”.
20
The Amps & FX Page
8. THE AMPS & FX PAGE
Clicking on the Amps & FX tab (at the bottom of the instrument) will open a page where you can
apply several studio effects to the signal.
The Amps & FX Page
The effects chain displays the currently loaded effects. Clicking an effect icon displays its settings
in the inspector section below.
• To change the order of the effects, simply drag and drop the respective icon in the effects
chain display.
• To bypass an effect, click the yellow square button next to its name.
• To bypass the entire effects chain, click on the yellow square to the left of the Amps & FX
page title. Please consider that the effects still require processing power, unless the effects
chain is cleared.
• To clear the entire effects chain, click on the Clear All button in the upper right corner and
confirm.
If you want to process the unaltered direct signal with external effect plugins, you
can save CPU resources by clearing the entire FX chain. Keep in mind that if stereo
doubling is enabled, two individual signal chains are required, i.e., one amp simula-
tion for the left output channel and another one for the right output channel. If in
doubt, listen to the stereo width: If the stereo doubled signal collapses to mono when
applying external effects, the signal path is not “true stereo”.
21
The Amps & FX Page
• To remove an effect, click on the Clear Slot button on the right side.
• To automate effects parameters, record the knob movements as automation data via the
“write automation” functionality of your sequencer. Alternatively, you can assign MIDI control-
lers via right-click on the respective knob. However, if you change the loaded effects subse-
quently, it is recommended to delete previously recorded automation to avoid accidental arbi-
trary modulation of parameters.
• To load a different effect into the current slot, click the magnifier icon next to the inspector
heading or click the magnifier icon that appears when hovering the name of an effect slot. This
will open the AMPS & FX BROWSER. In that browser, click on the desired effect to load it into
the selected slot. If the effect slot wasn’t empty, the loaded effect will automatically replace the
previously loaded one.
The Amps & FX Browser
The sound presets are fully backward-compatible to the first version of ELECTRIC
SUNBURST. This means that the legacy chorus, flanger and phaser effects are still
included. To load those legacy versions, ALT+click on Choral, Flair, and Phasis in
the Amps & FX browser.
22
The Amps & FX Page
For greater sonic versatility, the included amp models do not include speaker mod-
els. Instead, you can freely combine each amp model with each virtual speaker cabi-
net. Therefore, to simulate a traditional guitar amplifier, make sure that an amp mod-
el is always followed by a virtual speaker cabinet in a separate effect slot. It is advis-
able to study some of the included presets for reference.
23
The Playback Page
9. THE PLAYBACK PAGE
Clicking on the Playback tab (at the bottom of the instrument) will open the Playback page. This
page contains settings that affect the way the patterns are played back. This page is divided into
several sections, each of which is described below.
• To exclude the Playback settings from Songs or snapshots, click the lock icon on the Playback
tab at the bottom of the instrument (see section Locking Parameters When Loading Snapshots
or Songs).
The Playback Page
• SWING: Use the Amount knob to set the amount of swing added to each pattern, either on an
8th note or a 16th note basis. A setting of 0% would represent the original state of all patterns.
If the Amount knob doesn't affect the playback, it is very likely that either a triplet
pattern is selected, or the timing basis has to be changed from 8th to 16th notes.
• HUMANIZE: Use the Performance knob to set the amount of quantization added to all patterns.
In the right position, the timing of the original performance will remain unaltered. At the left po-
sition, the performance will be fully quantized.
• DEFAULT MODE (melody instrument): In the melody instrument, you can combine melodic
playing and pattern playback into one cohesive performance. When set to Melody, you can
play melodies by default, and holding down a pattern keyswitch will temporarily trigger a pat-
tern. When set to Pattern, the instrument will perform patterns by default, and holding down
24
The Playback Page
one of the melody keyswitches will temporarily allow you to play melodies (for more informa-
tion, see Combining Melodies and Patterns).
• LATCH MODE: After you have released all keys, the pattern playback will automatically stop
within the note duration specified in the LATCH MODE drop-down menu.
The slightly delayed stopping of the playback enables the engine to perform
smooth transitions from one chord to the next, even if the incoming MIDI notes
are not played as a seamless legato performance. However, if you want to stop
the performance at a specific position in the arrangement, e.g., to perform a
break, it is advisable to trigger one of the “ending keys” (G#1, A1, Bb1) at the de-
sired position.
• PATTERN SYNC: Use the drop-down menu to select one of two available sync modes.
• Sync to host: With this mode selected, pattern playback will start in sync with your host
sequencer. As ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE is based on two-bar patterns, make sure
to start your song on bar one or any other uneven bar number (e.g. bar 3, bar 5, bar 17).
• Start on a key: With this mode selected, pattern playback will start from the beginning as
soon as the first chord is being played, ignoring the current host playback position. As long
as the playback does not get interrupted (see description of the LATCH MODE section
above), this shifted performance will be retained even if you subsequently play chords.
• TIMING: Increase the offset for a laid back feel or decrease the offset to have the virtual guita-
rist play before the beat.
• TEMPO: Here, you can select between three tempo ratios 1⁄2 (half time), 1:1 (normal time), or
×2 (double time), which will globally affect the pattern playback speed relative to the host tem-
po. Please note that there is also a local time scaling feature available for each pattern (see
section The Inspector Panel). The individual patterns' tempo factors will each be multiplied by
the global tempo factor.
With slow host tempos, switching the global tempo to half time may not work if
the actual relative tempo falls below the limit of around 65 bpm.
25
Tips and Tricks
10. TIPS AND TRICKS
Last, but not least, the developers would like to share a couple of tips to help you get the most out
of ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE:
10.1. Use the Melody Instrument to enhance the Pattern Play-
back
The new melody feature makes it possible to add melodic fills to spice up an otherwise repetitive
performance: Load the Melody.nki and switch the default mode on the Playback page to Pattern.
Now, you can perform patterns just like in the regular instrument, but holding down a melody key-
switch will enable you to add monophonic or polyphonic fill-ins or variations to the pattern perform-
ance. The instrument will create smooth transitions between patterns and melody notes, if possi-
ble. Use the velocity reduction feature on the Guitar Settings page to even out dynamic differen-
ces between pattern and melody playback. This will result in a more cohesive performance. If As
played is selected in the voicing drop-down menu, the voicing will be an exact representation of
the incoming MIDI notes. This way, playback in melody mode and pattern mode will be based on
the exact same notes, which helps create smooth transitions between patterns and melodies.
10.2. Vary the number of played notes in Arpeggio Patterns
Most arpeggio patterns contain a lot more variability than meets eye: Depending on the number of
notes contained in a voicing, the rhythmic structure, as well as the distribution of the incoming
notes varies significantly. To get a general idea of a pattern’s possibilities, it is advisable to listen to
its included voicings. For maximum flexibility, however, try deactivating the voicing feature by se-
lecting As played in the voicing drop-down menu. Now, you can smoothly transition between the
different variations of a pattern, simply by altering the number of notes you play simultaneously.
10.3. Create Natural Transitions between Chords
To create realistic sounding transitions between chords, do not quantize your keyboard perform-
ance. Instead, make sure that all chord and pattern changes are played as early as possible. This
way, ELECTRIC SUNBURST DELUXE can anticipate that a chord change or pattern change is
about to take place and perform the transitions between patterns and chords in the most natural
way. Depending on the chord progression, an appropriate fret noise is added automatically. These
natural transitions would be impossible if you quantized your MIDI data. Don’t worry about the tim-
ing, triggering the patterns before the beat will not make the performance sound out of time, as the
timing is bound to the internal metronome of your sequencer. Also make sure that chords do not
overlap, because an overlap would technically mean that two chords are played at the same point
in time.
26
Tips and Tricks
Bad: Quantized MIDI data will cause the chord changes to hap-
pen too late for the fret noises to be played back; this will not create realistic transitions.
Good: MIDI notes placed ahead of the quantized position will result in realistic-sounding transi-
tions. Note that the keyswitches are also triggered slightly before the actual chords.
10.4. Combine Patterns Creatively
We spent a lot of time to make transitions between patterns and chords as smooth and natural as
possible. Therefore, if you switch between patterns that have a similar playing style but different
rhythms, the transitions will very likely sound as smooth as if the resulting rhythm would have ac-
tually been performed this way. So instead of sticking to a single repetitive pattern for a long time,
you can enhance realism by switching back and forth between patterns to add variations here and
there. In most cases, adding minor rhythmical changes at the end of the second bar does the trick.
10.5. Create Custom Groove Variations
If you'd like to add variations to spice up a pattern using the technique described above, you might
find yourself in a situation where the beginning of a pattern contains the bit of rhythmical variation
you'd like to use at the end of another pattern. To move the variation into place, click the i button
(see The Inspector Panel for more information) to open the Inspector Panel and shift the pattern to
the desired position. Another way to get there is to use the End Step feature: Shorten the pattern
to e.g., 4 steps (= one-quarter note). Although the resulting pattern will be very short and thus will
sound pretty repetitive in itself, it will contain a predictable strumming pattern that you can switch
to anytime to add a variation to another pattern.
27
Tips and Tricks
10.6. Use Authentic Humanization
The Humanize knob does not add random offsets to create some kind of fake realism. Instead, it
recreates the exact timing of the guitarist as he recorded all the patterns in the studio. That means,
although the differences may be subtle, the Original setting feels much more like a real guitarist
because it delivers the actual timing of a real guitarist. To our ears, adding a shuffle value of
around 5-15% on top of the humanization creates very appealing results.
10.7. Use the Impact Slider as a “Drama Controller”
When moving towards a quiet passage in your song, move the impact slider to the left. As you ap-
proach the chorus, slowly move it to the right. If applied correctly, this makes the virtual guitarist
play towards a certain musical event, e.g. the chorus or a break. You can also use the pitch wheel
to smoothen the transition between patterns which are played at different volumes to a certain de-
gree.
10.8. Use Multiple Session Guitarist Instruments Simultane-
ously
Instead of using just one single pattern at a time, try the following: Open two instances of ELEC-
TRIC SUNBURST DELUXE. While instance one plays the regular chord progression of the song in
the low voicing, instance two plays only an empty fifth chord as a pedal point in a higher register.
Combining several different guitars and/or patterns in this manner can really help to open up your
arrangement. Try creative panning and/or doubling settings.
28
Credits
11. CREDITS
Product Concept, Design & Concept: Samuel Dalferth, Daniel Scholz, Sebastian Müller
UI/UX: Mirko Wannemacher, Fabian Ruf
KSP Scripting: Daniel Scholz
Product Owner: Christian Wachsmuth
Guitarists: Andreas Dombert, Joschi Joachimsthaler, Christoph Bernewitz
Recording Engineer: Samuel Dalferth
Documentation: Daniel Scholz, Samuel Dalferth
Library Concept: Samuel Dalferth, Sebastian Müller
Sound Presets: Sebastian Müller, Samuel Dalferth, Jonathan Kranz
Quality Assurance: Martin Müller, Jonathan Kranz, Carlos Ruiz, Francesco Sabatini
Marketing Manager: David Tinning
Artwork: Maik Siemer
Finalization & Encoding: Francesco Sabatini
Speaker IRs: 3 Sigma Audio
29