MANUAL
The information in this document is subject to change without notice and does not represent a
commitment on the part of Native Instruments GmbH. The software described by this document is
subject to a License Agreement and may not be copied to other media. No part of this publication
may be copied, reproduced or otherwise transmitted or recorded, for any purpose, without prior
written permission by Native Instruments GmbH, hereinafter referred to as Native Instruments. All
product and company names are ™ or ® trademarks of their respective owners.
Manual written by Aleksander Rebane
Document Version: 1.1 (06/2010)
Product Version: 1.0.1
Special thanks to the Beta Test Team, who were invaluable not just in tracking down bugs, but in
making this a better product.
Germany
Native Instruments GmbH
Schlesische Str. 28
D-10997 Berlin
Germany
info@native-instruments.de
www.native-instruments.de
USA
Native Instruments North America, Inc.
5631 Hollywood Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90028
USA
sales@native-instruments.com
www.native-instruments.com
© Native Instruments GmbH, 2010. All rights reserved.
Table Of Contents
1 Welcome to REAKTOR SPARK!............................................................................................5
2 Interface Overview. ............................................................................................................6
3 Using REAKTOR SPARK. ......................................................................................................7
3.1 Signal Flow. .............................................................................................................7
3.2 Tutorial. ................................................................................................................. 10
4 Control Reference. ........................................................................................................... 19
4.1 Oscillators Section. ................................................................................................20
4.2 Ring Mod/Filter Section. .........................................................................................22
4.3 Shaper Section......................................................................................................24
4.4 Special Section . ....................................................................................................25
4.5 Mixer Section .......................................................................................................26
4.6 Cabinet Section.....................................................................................................27
4.7 8-Pole Filter Section..............................................................................................28
4.8 Mod Delay Section . ...............................................................................................29
4.9 Reverb Section......................................................................................................30
4.10 Oscillator Envelope Section.................................................................................... 31
4.11 Modulation Envelope Section. .................................................................................33
4.12 4.13 Modulation Envelope Amounts Section. ...................................................................34
Modulation Macro Controller Section. .....................................................................35
4.14 LFO Section ..........................................................................................................36
5 Credits............................................................................................................................38
REAKTOR SPARK – IV
1 Welcome to REAKTOR SPARK!
Thank you very much for purchasing REAKTOR SPARK. On behalf of the entire Native
Instruments team, we hope this instrument will truly inspire you.
REAKTOR SPARK puts a large collection of production-ready sounds for contemporary music
production directly under your fingertips: REAKTOR SPARK has it all, from pad to lead sounds,
from percussive keyboards to floating soundscapes.
It is a diverse collection of dynamic and expressive sounds based on the innovative SPARK
ensemble: saucy synth leads, vibrant percussive sounds, and quasi-chaotically evolving pads,
readily responding to your individual way of playing. In either a studio environment or a live
performance situation, the sounds included can be used in Rock, Jazz, Industrial, Psychedelic,
Sound Tracks, and various electronic genres ranging from Electro to IDM, but the musical
genre is actually not important. It’s all up to you...
We hope you enjoy this fine instrument as much as we do.
- The team at Native Instruments
REAKTOR SPARK – 5
2 Interface Overview
The SPARK Ensemble in REAKTOR
SPARK takes full advantage of the far-reaching capabilities of REAKTOR. The main concept
behind SPARK is to allow dramatic real-time influence on the sound source. Like a natural
instrument, it needs to be played expressively in order to reach its full potential. SPARK’s
secret lies in the way it uses various feedback loops to generate its own input, enabling you
to influence the sound with relatively few, but carefully chosen parameters.
REAKTOR SPARK – 6
3 Using REAKTOR SPARK
It is exactly because of SPARK’s unconventional signal routing that SPARK achieves its ex-
pressive sonic character. Not only SPARK’s sonic capabilities set it apart from other more
conventional synthesizers, but also the way it is used. To help you get familiar with the be-
haviour of SPARK’s controls, we will briefly discuss the signal flow within the ensemble and
then proceed to demonstrate the most prominent aspects of SPARK in a step-by-step tutorial.
3.1 Signal Flow
SPARK’s control panel features the access to parameters that cannot be intuitively under-
stood without knowledge of the signal flow. According to the figure on the following page, we
will go through the main aspects of SPARK’s signal flow. The names of the different parts of
the signal flow that directly correspond to the labels in the control panel are capitalized and
given the name sections.
The sound generation in the instrument happens by two oscillators, Pulse and Sine, in the
Oscillators section. Here we see how the output of two simple oscillators is more than just
simple static waveforms: SPARK’s signal routing makes it possible to create complex and
evolving waveforms by letting the feedback signal control both oscillators by frequency modu-
lation and/or the Pulse oscillator by hard synchronization. In the figure on the next page, the
bold lines illustrate the path of the feedback signal.
REAKTOR SPARK – 7
This diagram shows SPARK’s feedback signal flow
The output of the Oscillators section is the mixed with the feedback signal by the crossfader
marked as “Filter FB” and fed as the carrier signal to an amplitude modulator, the first ele-
ment in the Ringmod/Filters section. Again, the modulating signal again is the feedback signal.
Amplitude modulation reduces the presence of the carrier signal harmonics, but adds the
harmonics of the modulation signal into the mix in a more complex manner than just adding
the two signals together.
The amplitude modulated signal is then ring modulated by the output of the Oscillators sec-
tion. Ring modulation causes the harmonics to be mixed in a manner similar to amplitude
REAKTOR SPARK – 8
modulation with the difference that the harmonics of the incoming signals are not left intact.
This often causes inharmonic spectra. The signal from the ring modulator is then fed to the
filter, and subsequently to the shaper.
The voice delay in the Special section is a key element in the creating the feedback signal, it
determines which frequencies are excited in the feedback loop. The frequency shifter is the
last structure that allows direct manipulation of the frequency content of the spectra.
In the Mixer section, the signals from different points along the described path can be tapped
and mixed together to be processed by the Effects section. The effects are always running
and the degree that the output of the Mixer section is processed by a certain effect unit is
controlled by the unit´s Mix Knob.
The feedback signal is put together in the Special section using the “FB Mono” and “Int –
Ext” crossfaders, where turning the knobs to the right increasingly crossfades to the signal
that is represented on the right side of the crossfader in the figure. By now it is fairly obvious
that the sound that reaches the instrument output at the end of the effects chain can have a
wide range of timbres and evolving behaviours made possible by manipulating the feedback
loop. Even with good knowledge of the signal flow the effects of changing the parameters can
often be quite surprising, but that is also part of the fun when exploring SPARK’s capabilities.
REAKTOR SPARK – 9
3.2 Tutorial
In this tutorial we will use a sound from the REAKTOR SPARK SOUNDPACK and manipulate
it using the SPARK control panel with the goal to create a new sound with certain character-
istics. We want to make use of some of the special qualities of SPARK and for that reason
we will opt for two main characteristics: first, the sound should exhibit a full, warm character
that responds to the way notes are played and second, we want to implement SPARK’s feed-
back loop to create interesting self-oscillating ripples that accompany the sound. The sound
should have a definite pitch and have behaviour predictable enough that melodies can be
played with it at both slow and fast speeds.
The universal Value Display in the SPARK Ensemble
To see the exact values of the currently handled controller, use the orange Value Display located
above the Cabinet saturator unit. If you just want to check what value a controller has, click
on it, and press the up or down arrow key on your keyboard. The value of that controller will
appear in the universal Value Display.
To start off, we load the “Paddikk” REAKTOR Snapshot by Denis Gökdag. Play around with
the sound a bit and note the slow attack time and the periodic chorus-like effect induced by
the LFO. For further playback of the sound during this tutorial, we will stick to the MIDI note
C4 (MIDI value 72), as the timbre of the sound can significantly differ in different registers.
First, we remember that, instead of a slowly evolving pad, we are looking for a synth lead type
of sound, and we shouldn’t have to wait after pressing the key to hear the sound. We see that
the amplitude envelope in the Oscillators section shows a long attack time. Turn the knob
with the label A to the value -4 and hear that playing a note will yield a sound right away.
REAKTOR SPARK – 10
Set an Attack time value of -4 by clicking the Knob labelled A and dragging the mouse downwards.
Also notice how even such a small change can drastically influence the feel of the sound. The
Vel to Level Fader is important to how our sound responds to the hardness we play the notes
with (velocity): right now we see it have a value of 1. This means that the peak amplitude of
the oscillators, as determined by the envelope, responds linearly to the velocity. Playing the
MIDI keys softly yields a different sound than hitting the keys hard. See the Control Reference
section for more information on this.
Next we want to find out how the chorus-type effect is created and how we can change its
timing. As we play the note we notice that the movement of the horizontal fader labelled
MC3 on the top part of the screen coincides with the effect. MC3 is one of the three macro
controllers that can be assigned to modulate a number of parameters within SPARK by the
menus and sliders to the right of the macro controllers. Note that you need to hit the MIDI
keys with a certain velocity to hear the chorus-type effect.
The MC3 Fader’s settings are currently being modulated by an LFO.
The lit LED left of the controller MC3 indicates that the LFO, which is controlled by the knobs
in the top left part of the screen, is currently modulating this parameter. We can change the
LFO Rate to make the effect happen more frequently, or increase the LFO Amount to make
the effect stronger.
REAKTOR SPARK – 11
Turning the LFO Rate and Amount Knobs changes the character of the chorus effect.
For now let us turn off the LFO modulation of MC3 by clicking on the button left of the MC3
Fader. While playing the note we can also manually move MC3 by clicking and dragging the
MC3 Fader with the mouse. We see that the movement of the Time Knob in the Special section
of SPARK’s control panel coincides with the movement of the MC3 Fader. We see also that to
the right of the MC3 Fader in the menu the item Delay Time has been chosen. Also, the slider
on the right of the menu determines the extent of the change of the Delay Time Parameter
with a movement of the MC3 Fader. Setting the slider to its midpoint causes the MC3 Fader
to have no effect on the corresponding parameter. For now we don’t want to manipulate the
parameters by the macro controllers but directly. We turn our attention to the Delay Time Knob
in the Special section and turn it all the way to the left.
While turning the Delay Time Knob, you hear a chorus effect.
Next, we move on to the Oscillators section, where the sound generators of SPARK lie.
REAKTOR SPARK – 12
The sound generation in SPARK is controlled with the Oscillators section.
To acquaint ourselves with the sound of the two oscillators and to hear the effects of our
manipulations of the oscillator parameters in the direction of a slightly harsher sound, we
can use the Pulse and Sine Knobs in the Mixer section below the Oscillators section. Turn up
the Sine Knob and turn the Sine FM Knob to its vertical, zero position. We hear that the less
FM modulation we have of the Sine oscillator, the softer the sound gets. Turning the Sine FM
Knob to either side adds harmonics to the sound. The FM Knobs determine how much of the
feedback signal frequency modulates the respective oscillator, and depending on what the
feedback signal is, the effect can be more pronounced. After you have heard the effect of
this knob, set Sine FM to around 0.8.
Now we turn the Sine Knob down again and turn up the Pulse Knob. A characteristic parameter
for the Pulse waveform is the Pulse Width. As we turn the PW Knob to its vertical position we
hear some of the buzziness leave the sound and get replaced by the sound of a symmetric
Pulse oscillator. With PW at 0.4 we should have a good balance between buzziness and the
odd overtones of the Pulse oscillator. Changing the Pulse FM Knob we can hear additional
subtle differences in timbre similar to what we heard before with the Sine FM Parameter.
Again, the effect depends on the feedback signal. Leaving Pulse FM at -1.0 will result in a
subtle influence on the sound.
Now that we know the sounds of our pure oscillators, you can turn the Pulse Knob down
again. If we want to change the mix between the Pulse and Sine oscillator signals leaving
the Oscillators section, we use the Pls – Sine Knob. We want to have a fuller sound, so we
turn that knob to have a value of 0.7, which means that we are mixing more of the frequency
REAKTOR SPARK – 13
modulated Pulse signal to the output. When we play the notes a bit longer, we noticed slight
oscillations in the timbre. This is partly the result of the feedback loop and our settings for
the FM Knobs. From a psychoacoustic perspective these slight modulations in the timbre go
a long way to make the human ear perceive sounds as full and dynamic, especially when the
pitches of the oscillators are not the same.
With the right ‘P’ Value Edit you can adjust the pitch of the Sine oscillator; with the left ‘P’ Value Edit you can
adjust the pitch of the Pulse oscillator.
Now we will see if what we said was true and transpose the pitch of the Pulse oscillator up 7 semitones by clicking
and dragging the Pitch Value Edit that is to the left of the PW Knob to 67.01. Clicking and dragging in front of the
decimal point transposes the pitch in semitones, clicking and draggin behind the decimal point transposes the pitch
in cents. So, we can also detune the Sine oscillator by dragging the digits behind the decimal point in the Pitch Value
Edit to the right of the PW Knob. When transposing the Sine pitch from 60.00 to 59.88, oscillations of the amplitude
appear from the interference of the detuned pitches. Notice though, that although the oscillators have two different
pitches, only one pitch is readily perceived and the two oscillators merge together to create one sound. The detun-
ing and modulation of pitches is a psychoacoustic trick to make sounds merge together and have a “fatter” timbre.
The Shaper section allows you to fatten up the sound.
This is a good moment to inspect the shaper effect. This nonlinear effect is very powerful if
used within a feedback loop. If you turn up the Drive Parameter and play with the Sat-Sine
and 2NDH Knobs you can see the potential for fat and funky sounds. For now we leave the
Sat-Sine and 2NDH Knobs in their zero position and set the Drive Knob to 14.
REAKTOR SPARK – 14
With the controls of the Ringmod/Filter section you can strongly influence the effect of the feedback signal on the
sound.
Now we turn our attention to the Ringmod/Filter section. The Filter Feedback Knob in the top
left of this section is a key element to the feedback loop. Turning it all the way to the left we
get a taste for self-oscillating behaviour in the feedback loop. This often works well in combina-
tion with the ring modulation unit, the amount of which is determined by the Ring Modulation
Mix Knob. The Amplitude Modulation Parameter is more subtle in its effect. Turning it either
to the positive or negative will spread the harmonics out and usually reduce the loudness of
the sound, but with high feedback settings surprising changes to the sound can take place.
To make use of the feedback signal, turn the Filter Feedback Knob to 0.4, since too much
feedback can cause strong resonances that completely change the character of the sound,
away from what we are working towards. To smooth the sound, turn the Amplitude Modulation
Parameter to 0.3. Now play around with the Ring Modulation Mix. Notice that with the feed-
back activated, the sound gains complexity and substance as more ring modulation is mixed.
Also, setting the Pls – Sine Knob to 0.35 adds more of the Pulse oscillator’s harmonics to the
sound. Set the Ring Modulation Mix Knob to 0.6, because we like the way the ring modulation
adds force to our sound.
The Static Filter CutoFF and Filter Resonance Knobs give you direct access to the frequency
content of the sound. Depending on the setting of the Filter Type Knob, different frequencies
get filtered out of the signal, the main reference being to the cutoff frequency set by the Static
Filter CutoFF Knob. For more details on the Filter Type Parameter and the filter types associ-
ated with its different settings see the Control Reference section. The Filter Resonance Knob
determines the amount the frequencies around the cutoff frequency are enhanced. Within a
feedback loop the resonance can have a very drastic effect, creating ringing or strongly self-
oscillating sounds, so it should be used with care. This is a good moment to play around with
REAKTOR SPARK – 15
the filter and shaper settings to get a feel for the filters behaviour within the feedback loop
and its interaction with the shaper.
Once you have had your fun with that, leave the Static Filter CutoFF at 24.0, the Filter
Resonance at 0.8, and the Filter Type at 0.3. The last parameter gives us all the lower fre-
quencies below the cutoff frequency, with a slight amount of the frequencies above the cutoff
frequency thrown into the mix. The cutoff frequency is chosen so that we still have quite a
soft, warm, but not dull sound and the resonance setting gives us quite a lot of frequency
excitation in the feedback loop (especially with the action of the shaper) that is still not out
of control.
The controls in the Mixer section allow you to selectively choose the spectral components in the sound.
We can also tap into the filter outputs directly and selectively, using the Mixer section. The
knobs labelled lp-2, lp-4, bp-2, bp-4, hp-2, and hp-4 determine the amount of signal from
the 2-pole lowpass, 4-pole lowpass, 2-pole bandpass, 4-pole bandpass, 2-pole highpass, and
4-pole highpass filters in the mix that gets routed to the Effects section. The “pole-number”
is a measure for the strength of the filter. A 4-pole lowpass filter suppresses the frequencies
above the cutoff frequency twice as much as a 2-pole lowpass filter. A bandpass filter sup-
presses all frequencies beyond a certain distance from the cutoff frequency and the highpass
filter suppresses frequencies below the cutoff frequency. See the Control Reference section
on more information on the filters. We want to add the fundamental Sine tone to our mix for
the low end and turn up the knobs for the bandpass and highpass filters to add the higher
frequencies, so set the knobs in the Mixer section as shown in the figure above.
REAKTOR SPARK – 16
In the Modulation Envelope Amounts section you can adjust how much the modulation envelope affects SPARK’s
most important parameters.
Right now our sound has good substance and structure, but something is still quite flat about
it. It’s time to get our hands on the Modulation Envelope Amounts section. This will allow
us to make the sound have more liveliness by responding to the hardness with which the
MIDI keys are struck and have the timbres evolve from the moment the note is played. The
shape of the modulation envelope is given in the Modulation Envelope section to the left of
the Modulation Envelope Amounts section. The modulation amount knobs determine how
the parameters corresponding to the knob labels are modulated by the envelope. The knobs
that have a plus and minus sign can also cause an inverse modulation. Turning the CutoFF
Modulation Knob, for example, to the very left, will yield a low cutoff value for the modulation
envelope peak, whereas when turned to the right, the cutoff will be higher for the envelope
peak. In most natural instruments the higher frequencies are excited a bit after the attack
phase and decay first. Following that observation we set the Cutoff Modulation Knob to 11
and the Drive Modulation Knob to 8 (since a higher drive causes higher frequencies to be
excited). Modulation amount knobs without the plus and minus signs always cause a positive
modulation, that is, the modulation envelope peak causes the modulated parameter also to
be increased. We may remember, that for most natural instruments, it takes a certain amount
of time for the resonances characteristic to that instrument to build up. For that matter we
might also want to set the ring modulation amount to follow the modulation envelope by
turning the RM Knob all the way up. This gives a nice resonance to our sustained sound. We
notice that the FB Filt Knob is turned all the way up. This means that the feedback signal to
the filter input is suppressed by the modulation envelope, also suppressing resonances that
might be interesting to our sound. Turning the FB Filt Knob down to the value 0.3 gives us a
longer lasting ring and further adds to the substance of the sound.
REAKTOR SPARK – 17
The LFO modulates the MC2 Fader which is assigned to change the Static Filter CutoFF Parameter.
We remember that we liked to have a rippling effect as part of our synth lead, and until now
we have only been working on the core substance of the sound. How could we add a periodic
rippling into the mix? The key lies in the word period, for that is exactly what we started out
with in this tutorial, looking at periodic movements of the Delay Time Knob, controlled by the
Macro Controller 3, which in turn was controlled by the LFO.
In order to add a rippling effect, we will use the Macro Controller 2. Activate the LFO control
of MC2 by clicking the button left of the MC2 Fader and turn the LFO Amount Knob to 0.5 to
have a substantial modulation of MC2 by the LFO. You should be able to see the MC2 Fader
move as it is modulated by the LFO. Now we will set the destination parameter that should
be controlled by the LFO, hence by MC2. Now go to the CutoFF Slider that is in the same
row as MC2 and on the very right of the screen. Move it about halfway to the right, as seen
in the figure, to determine the amount of modulation that the Filter CutoFF Parameter should
receive from MC2. Moving the slider to the left of its mid-point will cause negative modula-
tions. Now we are ready to speed up the LFO, causing a rippling sound: while you play a note
to hear the effect of this change, increase the LFO Rate Knob by the LFO controls to almost
maximum value.
Congratulations! You have just created your first SPARK sound by using SPARK’s unique
feedback capabilities and without even having laid your hands on the Effects section. Now
that you have become familiar with SPARK’s new controls, you can start having fun with your
own sonic explorations – and the effects section. For more details and ideas to the use of all
controls, including the ones not discussed in this tutorial, be sure to check out the SPARK
Control Reference section.
REAKTOR SPARK – 18
4 Control Reference
The exact value of the currently selected controller is seen in the orange Value Display. You can see the global tuning
properties of the instrument placed next to the Value Display.
To see the exact values of the currently handled controller, use the orange universal Value
Display. If you just want to check what value a controller has, click on it, and press the up or
down arrow key on your keyboard. The value of that controller will appear in the Value Display.
To transpose SPARK from the notes it receives from the host sequencer or MIDI keyboard, use
the Tune Value Edit. Clicking and dragging the whole number in the Tune Value Edit changes
the transposition in semitones. To fine tune the transposition, click and drag the digits after
the decimal point. This changes the transposition in cents.
The Voices Value shows the number of voices that are used for one note to create the unison
effect. The left number denotes the maximum number of polyphonic voices and the right
number shows the number of unison voices of the instrument. When the number of available
voices is exceeded by polyphonic playing, that is, the number of keys that are simultaneously
pressed, then the actual number of unison voices will be reduced automatically. These num-
bers are set in the header or the Properties of the instrument.
If the number of unison voices is more than one, the SprD Controller can be used to spread
out the tuning of the individual voices around the note pitch, creating a fatter sound. You can
change the number of unison voices with the Max Unison V and Min Unison V parameters in
the Instrument Properties Page. For more details see the REAKTOR User Manual.
For small values the ranD Parameter adds a more analog feel to the sound, for large values
it creates a chaotic behaviour of the synthesizer. The ranD Parameter controls the amount
of random detuning applied to each voice when a note is played by the host sequencer or a
key is pressed on the MIDI controller. This is called a note-on event.
With the pb Value Edit you change how much the pitchbend controller on your MIDI keyboard
or host sequencer can change the pitch.
REAKTOR SPARK – 19
4.1 Oscillators Section
The main source of waveforms in SPARK is controlled with the Oscillators section.
The Amplitude Knob controls the amplitude of the output signal of the Oscillator section. This
applies to both the mixed signal and the Sine output signal that goes directly to the Mixer
section.
The Pls-Sine Mix Knob determines the main characteristic of the sound source. It acts as a
crossfader between the Pulse and Sine Oscillators for the mixed output signal. Turning the
Pls-Sine Mix Knob to the right yields a sound with a softer character typical of a sinus tone.
Turning the Pls-Sine Mix Knob to the left mixes more of the Pulse signal to the output, result-
ing in a brighter timbre.
The Static PW Knob you can use to further change the timbre of the Pulse signal. It controls
the static amount of the Pulse width of the Pulse oscillator. With the Knob set in its vertical
position, a symmetrical Pulse signal with only odd harmonics is generated. Turning the Static
PW Knob either to the right or to the left, the Pulse becomes more asymmetrical, adding even
harmonics to the spectrum. The difference between turning to the left or to the right can be
very strong if the PW Knob is not set to zero.
The Pitch Value Edit found on the left of the Static PW Knob and Amplitude Knob controls the
pitch of the Pulse and Sine Oscillator, respectively, when the Note C3 is played. Clicking and
dragging the Pitch Value Edit to the left of the decimal point transposes the oscillator pitch in
semitones. To fine tune the oscillators, click and drag to the left of the decimal point in the
Pitch Value Edit. Slightly detuning one oscillator from the other yields a fatter sound. Below
the Pitch Value Edit lies the Pitch Tracking Value Edit for the corresponding oscillator pitch.
This controls the response of the oscillator pitch to the MIDI note that is played. When set
REAKTOR SPARK – 20
to 0.0, the note displayed in the Pitch Value Edit is played regardless of the MIDI note. A
setting of 1.0 yields equally tempered tuning.
In order to make the sinus signal have a brighter character, the Sine FM Knob is used. It sets
the amount of frequency modulation of the Sine Oscillator by the feedback signal. When the
Pls – Sine Mix Knob is completely set to Sine, setting the Sine FM Knob to a nonzero value
results in a kind of sawtooth sound.
Similarly, nonzero settings of the Pulse FM Knob can strongly alter the character waveform of
the signal exiting the Pulse Oscillator. The Pulse FM Knob controls the amount of frequency
modulation of the Pulse Oscillator by the feedback signal.
The Key Sync Button is a parameter that determines the reproducabilty of sounds when the
same notes are successively played. With the Key Sync Button turned on, the Sine and Pulse
Oscillators restart at zero with each note-on event received from the MIDI keyboard or host
sequencer. See ranD Parameter for a description of the note-on event.
Setting the Sync Button to + or – often leads to chaotic behaviour, sometimes with pitch
drifting or a crackling timbre. The Sync Button activates the hard sync of the Pulse Oscillator,
restarting the waveform with each zero crossing of the feedback signal. The Sync Button
settings + and - restart the Pulse with positive or negative zero crossings of the feedback
signal, respectively. The setting of the PW Knob has a strong influence on the effect of the
hard synchronization. With the Sync Button in the OFF position, the Pulse Oscillator can be
synced to note-on events if the Key Sync Button is in the On position. See ranD Parameter
for a description of the note-on event.
REAKTOR SPARK – 21
4.2 Ring Mod/Filter Section
With the controls of the Ringmod/Filter section you can strongly influence the effect of the feedback signal on the
sound.
One can very drastically change the character of the sound by turning the Filter FB Knob con-
trol only slightly. The result can be self-oscillating sounds with a pitch that is only dependent
on the cutoff frequency of the filter, or sounds resembling acoustic feedbacks of microphones,
speakers, or guitar amps. The Filter FB Knob controls the amount of feedback signal mixed
to the Oscillator section output before it gets routed to the Ring Mod/Filter section.
The AM Knob enables you to add additional harmonics to the signal from the Oscillators sec-
tion entering the Ring Modulator. This parameter usually has a subtle effect. With the AM
Knob you control the amount of amplitude modulation applied to the mixed outputs of the
Oscillators section and the feedback signal. The mixed output is amplitude modulated by the
feedback signal.
With the RM Mix Knob you can change the characteristic of the sound by adding inharmonic
components to the signal. This parameter determines the amount of ring modulation the am-
plitude modulated signal receives. The modulating signal comes directly from the Oscillators
section.
The source signal for the ring modulator is controlled by the RM Pls-Sine Knob. Turning the
knob to the left yields a harsher sound, turning it to the right a softer sound. The RM Pls-Sine
Knob determines how much of the modulating signal comes from the Pulse Oscillator and
how much from the Sine Oscillator. The modulating signal from the Oscillators section is not
affected by the Oscillator Envelope.
REAKTOR SPARK – 22
The Static CutoFF Knob is a main parameter of the Filter section. It determines which frequen-
cies are filtered out of the signal and which ones are passed on to the output of this section.
The Static CutoFF Knob is used as a reference value for the cutoff frequency of both parts
of the multi-mode filter. The difference between the cutoff frequencies of the two filters is
controlled by the Split Knob.
Filters not only filter out frequencies, but also enhance others. The Resonance Knob controls
the amount of resonance of both filters, that is, the amount of the signal enhancement at
cutoff frequency. High values yield a sound that resembles a sinus tone.
Depending on the setting of the Filter Type Knob, one can filter out different frequencies in
relation to the cutoff frequency. A lowpass filter (LP) lets frequencies below the cutoff fre-
quency pass, a highpass filter (HP) lets frequencies above the cutoff frequency pass, and a
bandpass filter (BP) lets frequencies within a certain distance from the cutoff frequency pass.
The setting of the Filter Type Knob determines the type for both filters.
The Filter Slope Knob controls how much the frequencies outside of the filter’s “pass”-interval
are damped before the signal is passed to the Shaper section. Turn the Filter Slope Knob to
the left for weaker filtering, to the right for stronger filtering. The Filter section consists of
two serially connected filters, each damping 12 dB/octave. The Filter Slope Knob determines
if the output signal of only one or both filters is used for the Shaper section input.
The Filter Track Knob sets the tracking amount of the filter cutoffs. Since digital instruments
seem to sound too bright when notes in the higher registers are played, using the Filter Track
Knob helps you counteract that so the cutoff frequency of the filter depends on the note that
is played. When the Filter Track Knob set to 0.0, no tracking with the key position takes place,
and when set to 1.0, the key position relative to C3 is fully added to the filter cutoff. For
sounds that don’t exhibit an excessively bright timbre in the upper registers, turn the Filter
Track Knob to a value between 0.0 and 1.0.
The color of the Filter section’s output signal can be further controlled with the Filter FM
Knob. This parameter controls how much the filter cutoff frequency is modulated by the filter
input signal.
REAKTOR SPARK – 23
4.3 Shaper Section
The Shaper section allows you to fatten up the sound.
Wave-shaping adds interesting amplitude-dependent sound colors. The amount of distortion
and harmonics added to the signal is controlled by the Shaper Drive Knob. It determines the
input gain of the Shaper section.
The Sat - Sine Knob lets you crossfade between two characteristic sounds resulting from two
wave-shaping curves: a parabolic saturation curve and a Sine curve, which folds back the
waveform of larger signals.
Similarly, the 2ndH Knob lets you change the harmonic content of the signal resulting from
the wave-shaping. At zero the shaping curves are symmetric, creating mainly odd harmonics.
With larger values the curve gets increasingly asymmetric and the amount of the 2nd and
other even harmonics is increased.
REAKTOR SPARK – 24
4.4 Special Section
The special section houses key parameters that determine the composition of the feedback signal.
The first unit encountered by the signal entering the Special section is the polyphonic Voice
Delay. The delay time of the voice delay is set with the Delay Time Knob. It has a big influence
on which frequencies will be excited in the feedback path. You can use the delay also in the
forward signal, just mix it with the other output signals by using the Del/Fs Knob and you get
a coloring or chorusing effect. The Delay Time of the polyphonic delay is set in milliseconds.
When Delay Track is not zero the actual delay time depends on the note that is being played.
When the Delay Track Knob is set to 0.0 there is no tracking, when it is set to 1.0 the delay
time is the reciprocal of the frequency (oscillating period) of the note.
The Frequency Shift Amount Knob causes all frequencies entering the Frequency Shifter unit to
be changed by that amount. This usually results in an inharmonic or phasing sound. Depending
on the setting of the Frequency Shift Amount Knob the frequencies get shifted by 0.2 Hz to
10000Hz. If the Neg Button is in the on position, the frequencies get shifted down instead of
up. Negative frequencies resulting from the shift get mirrored back into the positive spectrum.
The Color Knob adjusts the internal feedback signal, higher values create higher harmonics
and stronger phasing effects. Use this to brighten up the sound at higher shift frequencies or
to create a stronger phasing effect at lower shift frequencies. The Frequency Shifter Mix Knob
controls the amount of frequency shifted (wet) signal mixed to the non-frequency shifted (dry)
signal before it gets sent to the output of this unit.
The FB Mono and FB Int - Ext Knobs are key parameters controlling the mix of the feedback
signal. The FB Mono Knob acts as a crossfader between the polyphonic Delay unit’s output
and the monophonic signal mixed together from the Frequency Shifter unit’s output and the
REAKTOR SPARK – 25
output of the Effects section. The mix of the monophonic signal is determined by the FB Int
- Ext Knob. Here possibilities arise for very interesting effects like cross-talk between the indi-
vidual voices. This arises when a nonzero setting of the FB Mono Knob causes the monophonic
feedback signal to be distributed among all the voices of the polyphonic feedback signal.
4.5 Mixer Section
The controls in the Mixer section allow you to selectively choose the spectral components in the sound.
The Mixer section dictates what gets routed to the Effects section and its various knobs give
easy access to controlling the overall spectral characteristics of the sound. The Pulse and
Sine controls determine how much of the unprocessed Sine and Pulse Oscillator outputs get
added to the mix (see Oscillators section for sound characteristic of each). The Oscillator
Envelope modulates the amplitude of the oscillator signals before they enter the Mixer section.
The lp-2, lp-4, bp-2, bp-4, hp-2, and hp-4 Knobs control the amounts of the various filter
outputs coming from the Ringmod/Filter section. lp-2 and LP-4 determine how much of the
12 dB/octave and 24/dB octave lowpass filter outputs, respectively, get mixed to the Effects
section’s input. The same applies for the bp-2 and bp-4, hp-2 and HP-4 Knobs, where BP
stands for the bandpass and HP stands for high the pass filter. Similar to the filter controls
in the Mixer section, the Shaper Knob controls the amount of the Shaper unit’s output signal,
and the Del/Fs Knob controls the amount of the Frequency Shifter unit’s output signal enter-
ing the Effects section. The Output Controller determines the overall signal level sent from
the Mixer section to the Effects section. The left Level Meter in the output unit shows the
level behind the Output Controller.
The Ceiling Knob is used to control the maximum output level of SPARK. The Ceiling Knob
should be set a bit below 0 dB to prevent clipping at the soundcard. It functions as a control
for the signal level that comes from the ouput of the limiter unit placed behind the Effects
section. The right Level Meter in the output unit shows the amount that the synthesizer output
signal is reduced by the limiter.
REAKTOR SPARK – 26
4.6 Cabinet Section
The cabinet saturator works as an amp/speaker simulator.
The Cabinet saturator effect works as an amp/speaker simulator. The Drive Knob controls
the amount of distortion applied to the input signal. It sets the amount of gain for the input
signal. The core parameter of the Cabinet saturator effect is controlled by the Tilt Knob. This
parameter determines which frequencies get distorted: turn the Tilt Knob to the right for distor-
tion at lower frequencies and to the left for distortion at higher frequencies. The frequencies
entering and exiting the Cabinet saturator effect are modified by this parameter and hence
the character of the effect dramatically depends on the setting of the Tilt Knob. The Lo Cut
Freq Knob is useful to avoid a mess with the bass frequencies. It determines the cutoff fre-
quency below which the frequencies of the input signal are significantly damped. Lo Cut Res
determines the enhancement of the frequencies around the cutoff frequency. Similarly, the
Hi Cut Freq Knob determines whether the sound is soft or brilliant. It determines the cutoff
frequency of the lowpass filter placed at the output of the Cabinet Saturator Structure. Hi
Cut Res determines the enhancement of the frequencies around the cutoff frequency of that
lowpass filter.
The mixing of the output signal of the Cabinet Saturator happens with the Cab Level and
Cabinet Mix Knobs. Cab Level determines the output level of the saturation effect before it
gets mixed to the dry, unaffected signal. The balance between the two signals is set with the
Cabinet Mix Knob.
REAKTOR SPARK – 27
4.7 8-Pole Filter Section
With the 8-pole Filter you can filter the overall signal before it reaches the instrument output.
The 8-Pole Filter effect comprises four 4-pole filters: each stereo channel has a 4-pole lowpass
filter and a 4-pole highpass filter. The cutoff frequencies of the lowpass and highpass filters
are offset from a reference cutoff frequency. This offset is controlled by the Gap Knob. Since
the two filters are running in parallel and their output signals are mixed, the result of a positive
Gap is a band rejection. With a negative Gap the pass bands of both filters are overlapping
so that all frequencies can pass and the resonances emphasize the cutoff frequencies. The
difference between the reference cutoff frequencies of the two channels is controlled by the
lr OFFSet Knob. The Center Knob is used to set the mean value of the cutoff frequencies of
the two channels.
REAKTOR SPARK – 28
4.8 Mod Delay Section
With the modulation delay you can add echo or chorus effects to the instrument.
The Mod Delay effect is a tempo synchronizable stereo delay with LFO, cross-feedback, high-
pass and lowpass filters.
The Time Knob sets the delay time in milliseconds. This is the mean delay time since there
can be a delay time offset between the left and right channel. This offset is controlled by the
Delay lr OFFSet Knob. It sets the ratio between the delay times of the left and of the right
channel.
When Delay Feedback is nonzero and the Delay Time value is small, changing the Delay lr
OFFSet Knob changes the distribution of the sound in the stereo field. In order to synchronize
the Delay Time to the tempo specified by the host or by REAKTOR, the Delay Sync Button
can be activated. When Delay Sync is on, the value display will display the rate of the echoes
as a multiple of the BPM tempo. The strength and longevity of the echoes are controlled with
the Delay FB Knob. It sets the amount of feedback from the delay output to its input. Turning
on the Invert Button inverts the feedback signal. At short delays it makes a big difference
to the sound of the mixed signal if the feedback signal is inverted. The In Knob controls the
amount of input signal entering the Mod Delay effect. If an echo is sounding at the output of
the delay, turning the In Knob down will not turn down the echo, but let it naturally fade out.
The X Amt Controller determines the amount of the feedback that is routed crosswise from
the right delay output to the left delay input and vice versa. Use this to diffuse the sound
in the stereo field, for a reverb-like effect with short Delay Time settings. The Mod Delay ef-
fect has a stereo LFO as its delay time modulation source. Chorus effects can be achieved
when the Depth Knob value is not too large. Depth controls the amount of LFO modulation
applied to the delay time. The rate of the LFO is determined by the setting of the Rate Knob.
REAKTOR SPARK – 29
For additional stereo manipulation, the relative phase between the LFOs applied to the right
and left stereo channels can be controlled by the Phase Knob. Setting the Phase Knob to 0.0
yields the same phase for both channels, 0.5 yields a 90 degree phase shift and 1.0 yields
a 180 degree phase shift. The lower frequencies of the delayed signal can be damped using
the Delay Lo Cut Controller. It determines the cutoff frequency of the highpass filter placed
after the delay. Similarly, the Delay Hi Cut Controller sets the cutoff frequency above which
the higher frequencies are damped.
4.9 Reverb Section
With reverb you can add more spatial depth to your sound.
The Size Controller of the Reverb effect controls both main characteristics of the reverb effect:
the room size and the reverb decay time. Higher settings of the Size Knob will make the reverb
sound longer and stimulate a bigger space. Moving the Size Knob creates a chorus-like effect.
Reverb Lo Cut and Reverb Hi Cut determine the sound color of the reverberation signal. The
lower frequencies of the delayed signal are damped using the Reverb Lo Cut Controller. It
determines the cutoff frequency of the highpass filter placed after the reverb. Similarly, the
Reverb Hi Cut Controller sets the cutoff frequency above which the higher frequencies are
damped. The Reverb Mix Knob acts as a crossfader between the dry signal entering the Reverb
effect and wet signal at the output of the reverb effect. Turning the Reverb Mix Knob to the
right crossfades the output to the wet signal.
REAKTOR SPARK – 30
4.10 Oscillator Envelope Section
The Oscillator Envelope section determines the amplitude evolution of the Pulse and Sine oscillators.
The Oscillator Envelope section produces the modulating signal for the Sine and Pulse os-
cillator amplitudes. The Attack, Decay1, Breakpoint, Decay2, Sustain, and Release Parameters
of the oscillator amplitude envelope determine how the amplitude of the sound evolves over
time when a note is played. The time that the modulated oscillator amplitude takes before it
reaches its maximum value (determined by the Amplitude Knob), is called the attack time. The
attack time is controlled by the Attack Knob. Similarly, the time that the amplitude level takes
before it reaches its breakpoint value (determined by the Breakpoint Knob) is determined by
the Decay1 Knob. The Decay 2 Knob controls the time that the amplitude level takes to reach
the sustain level from the breakpoint level. The sustain level is the final, amplitude level of the
oscillator envelope that stays constant as long as the key remains pressed. You can change
it by using the Sustain Knob. The time that the amplitude level takes to go from the sustain
level to zero after the key has been released, is called the release time and is controlled by
the Release Knob.
To change the sensitivity of the overall amplitude level of the envelope to the key velocity, the
Vel to Level Fader is used. It determines the influence of the key velocity on the peak and
sustain levels of the envelope. If set to 0, there is no influence and these levels are constant
over all ranges of key velocity.
When set in the interval between 0 and 1, the linear velocity curve is used with the influence
to the levels increasing with the Vel to Level Value. The dynamic range for the highest linear
key velocity influence with the Vel to Level Value equal to 1 is 43 dB. For values between 1
and 2 the parabolic velocity curve is used with the influence to the levels increasing with the
Vel to Level Value. The parabolic velocity curve exhibits higher velocity sensitivity at higher
REAKTOR SPARK – 31
velocity values. The dynamic range for the highest parabolic key velocity influence with the
Vel to Level Value equal to 2 is 86 dB. Vel to Level settings higher than 1 are especially use-
ful for sounds saturated by the Cabinet saturator effect by compensating the compression
effect of saturation.
The sensitivity of the attack time to the key velocity can also be set. For longer attack times
when playing with high velocity give the Vel to Attack Value a positive, for shorter attack times
give the the Vel to Attack Value a negative value. Most acoustic instruments have shorter at-
tack times when played louder.
Just as the peak and sustain levels of the envelope can be made sensitive to the key veloc-
ity, they can also be made to depend on the note that is being played. Set the Level Scale
Fader to positive values for higher levels at higher notes. When set to +1.0, the amplification
is 12 dB per octave. For negative values of the Level Scale lower notes receive higher levels.
When set to -1.0, the attenuation of higher notes is 12 dB per octave. The level of the note
C3 stays the same as the scaling intervals are counted from that note.
The attack, decay, and release times can be scaled to the notes that are being played. Set the
Time Scale Fader to positive values for longer times for higher notes. A setting of +0.5 causes
the times to be doubled, a setting of +1.0 causes the times to be quadrupled for each octave
higher than the note C3. For negative values of the Time Scale Fader the times become shorter
for higher values. A setting of +0.5 causes the times to be halved, a setting of +1.0 causes
the times to be multiplied by one-fourth for each octave higher than the note C3.
REAKTOR SPARK – 32
4.11 Modulation Envelope Section
The Modulation Envelope section modulates key parameters in the instrument to liven up the sound.
8 key parameters of SPARK can be modulated by the Modulation Envelope section. This
envelope and its controls work in the same way as the oscillator amplitude envelope, except
that instead of modulating the oscillator amplitudes, the modulation envelope modulates the
8 parameters in ways determined in the Modulation Envelope Amounts section. For the details
on how the envelope parameters in the Modulation Envelope section influence the envelope
evolution see the Oscillator Envelope section.
REAKTOR SPARK – 33
4.12 Modulation Envelope Amounts Section
In the Modulation Envelope Amounts section you can adjust how much the modulation envelope affects SPARK’s
most important parameters.
The Modulation Envelope Amounts section allows you to significantly affect the way the sound
evolves over time and give it a more lively character. The modulation envelope determines
how the 8 parameters of SPARK are modulated by the Modulation Envelope section.
The – PW + Knob controls the amount of the modulation envelope signal that is added to
the Pulse width of the Pulse oscillator. When the knob is in the vertical position, no envelope
modulation of the Pulse width takes place.
With the FB Osc Knob you control how much the modulation envelope influences the feedback
to the FM inputs of the two oscillators.
The FB Filt Knob is the most influential parameter of this section. It has great control over the
self-oscillation of the synthesizer. When FB Filt is set to zero, self-oscillations would continue
independent from the playing of notes. If you want feedback oscillations only when a note is
played, you have to turn up the FB Filt Knob. The modulation envelope then will damp the
feedback loop to its time-variant output. The FB Filt Knob is a crossfader between a constant
1 and the modulation envelope signal as a multiplier for the feedback signal at the input of
the Ringmod/Filter section.
The amount of envelope modulation applied to the ring modulator is set with the RM Knob.
The – Cut + Knob determines the amount of the modulation envelope signal that is added to
the cutoff frequency in the Ringmod/Filter section.
The drive parameter of the Shaper unit is also important in feedback loops, since high input
gains before the saturator suppress the signal level and with it self-oscillations. For this pur-
REAKTOR SPARK – 34
pose you can use the – Drive + Knob to set the amount of the modulation envelope signal
that is added to the drive input of the Shaper unit.
With the – Del + Knob you control the amount of envelope modulation signal applied to the
Voice Delay unit’s delay time input. The values for – Del + are exponentially scaling with
base 10. This means that the range for an envelope amplitude of 1, a – Del + setting of -1.0
causes the static delay time to be multiplied by 0.1 and with a setting of +1.0 the delay time
is multiplied by 10.
In addition to manipulating the feedback structure, you can use the modulation envelope to
control the content of higher harmonics in the sound, by using the Mixer Knob. This parameter
determines the amount of envelope modulation applied to the HP-2 and Del/FS signals in the
Mixer section. A Mixer setting of 0.0 means that no modulation takes place and a setting of
1.0 means that the HP-2 and Del/FS signals are multiplied by the modulation envelope signal.
4.13 Modulation Macro Controller Section
The Modulation Macro Controllers modulate the parameters assigned to the right of the respective faders. You can
assign the modulation depth with the brown faders.
SPARK has three Modulation Macro Controllers that are most conveniently used with remote
controllers, in a keyboard setting roughly corresponding to a volume pedal, an expression
pedal, and the modulation wheel. Each Modulation Macro controls four parameters inside
SPARK, two of which can be freely selected from inside a menu.
The menu selection varies between the different macro controllers. On the SPARK graphical
user interface these Modulation Macro Controllers are faders labeled as MC1, MC2, and MC3.
They have already been assigned to the MIDI control numbers of the volume pedal (Ctrl 7),
the expression pedal (Ctrl 11), and the modulation wheel (Ctrl 1), for MC1, MC2, and MC3,
respectively.
REAKTOR SPARK – 35
MC1 has as its modulation destination in addition to the Amplitude and Drive Parameters two
parameters which can be chosen from the two drop-down menus. The modulation amount
for these modulation controls can be set by the corresponding faders. Sliding the fader to the
right causes positive, sliding it to the left, negative modulation amounts. This means that for
positive modulation amounts the destination parameter is increased as the Macro Controller
is increased in value. For negative modulation amounts the destination parameter would be
reduced as the Macro Controller is increased in value.
As with MC1, the Modulation Controller 2 has two preset modulation destinations: the filter
cutoff frequency and the filter resonance parameters of the Ringmod/Filter section. Two ad-
ditional parameters can be chosen as the modulation destination for MC2 from the drop-down
menus. The preset modulation destinations of the Modulation Controller 3 are the amount
of the feedback signal at the input of the Ringmod/Filter section and the Cabinet Mix, as are
the two parameters that can be selected from the drop-down menus.
4.14 LFO Section
With these controls you can adjust the main LFO parameters.
SPARK also has an LFO with a triangle waveform with adjustable symmetry and clipping as
an internal source of periodic controller movements. It can replace the automation of the host
sequencer or the pedal movements and lets you get your hands free for sound modifications.
The LFO can have four destinations: the Modulation Controllers 1, 2, and 3, and the Velocity
Controller. The routing of the modulation signal to each destination can be switched on or
off with the To Vel, To MC1, To MC2, and To MC3 Buttons for the Velocity Controller, MC1,
MC2, and MC3, respectively. These buttons are located on the left of the corresponding
controller’s fader.
REAKTOR SPARK – 36
When the button is alight, it means that the controller destination is receiving the LFO modu-
lation signal. How the LFO modulates the controller is reflected graphically in the fader’s
movements. The amount of LFO modulation to the destinations is dictated by the LFO Amount
Knob. It controls the peak to peak amplitude of the LFO signal. If the destination is positioned
in the middle of its full range, an LFO Amount setting of 1.0 would move the controller over
its entire range.
The LFO Rate Knob controls the frequency of the LFO. The units of the LFO Rate depend on
the state of the LFO Sync Button. If LFO Sync is off, LFO Rate is given in Hz. If LFO Sync is
on, the LFO Rate is given in oscillations per beat. The Key Sync Button causes the LFO to
be reset to zero at every note-on event. If Key Sync is off and LFO Sync is on, the LFO phase
also is synchronized to the song position. See ranD Parameter for a description of the note-
on event. The static phase of the LFO is controlled by the LFO Phase Knob. It shifts the LFO
phase in relation to the song position when Key Sync is off. When Key Sync is off, the LFO
Phase Knob determines the phase of the LFO at a note-on event. An LFO Phase of -1 corre-
sponds to the zero crossing of the waveform’s falling ramp. Similarly, -0.5 corresponds to the
lower peak of the LFO waveform, 0 to the zero crossing of the rising ramp, +0.5 to the upper
peak, and +1 again to the zero crossing the falling ramp.
To give you more control over the shape of the LFO waveform, the Clip, Clip Sym, and Tri Sym
Parameters are can be manipulated. The qualitative effect that the latter two parameters have
on the LFO waveform can be seen in the Clip Sym and Tri Sym FielDS.
The original waveform of the LFO is a triangle. The symmetry of the two ramps of the triangle
can be set using the Tri Sym Field. Positive values increase the speed of the rising ramp which
yields a falling sawtooth for a value of +1, a symmetric triangle for 0, and a rising sawtooth
for -1 as the Tri Sym value.
The Clip Knob dictates the amount of clipping of the LFO waveform. At zero it’s a triangle
waveform and with increasing values it becomes more like a rectangular waveform. The ef-
fect of the clipping on the LFO waveform can further be manipulated by changing the clip-
ping symmetry. This is done with the Clip Sym Field. At positive values the upper part of the
waveform, for negative values the lower part of the waveform is clipped harder. When Clip
Sym is set to +1 there is no clipping at the negative part of the waveform, and for -1 there is
no clipping at the positive part of the waveform.
REAKTOR SPARK – 37
5 Credits
Sound Design: Alex Hofmann, Denis Gökdag (Surround SFX), Dietrich Pank, Ema Jolly, Eoin
Rossney, Gustavo Bravetti, Jörg Hüttner, Jeremiah Savage, Martin Backes, Matthias Fuchs
(Visophon), Stephan Schmitt, Thomas Binek (Tasmodia), Thomas Koot, Tobias Menguser
SPARK Ensemble created by Stephan Schmitt.
Graphics Design for SPARK by Phirol.
REAKTOR SPARK – 38