Manual
Disclaimer
The information in this document is subject to change without notice and does not represent a
commitment on the part of Native Instruments GmbH. The software described by this docu-
ment is subject to a License Agreement and may not be copied to other media. No part of this
publication may be copied, reproduced or otherwise transmitted or recorded, for any purpose,
without prior written permission by Native Instruments GmbH, hereinafter referred to as Native
Instruments.
“Native Instruments”, “NI” and associated logos are (registered) trademarks of Native Instru-
ments GmbH.
Mac, Mac OS, GarageBand, Logic, iTunes and iPod are registered trademarks of Apple Inc.,
registered in the U.S. and other countries.
Windows, Windows Vista and DirectSound are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation
in the United States and/or other countries.
All other trade marks are the property of their respective owners and use of them does not im-
ply any affiliation with or endorsement by them.
Document authored by: Adam Hanley, Uli Baronowsky
Software version: 1.0 (07/2014)
Document version: 1.0 (07/2014)
Special thanks to the Beta Test Team, who were invaluable not just in tracking down bugs, but
in making this a better product.
Contact
NATIVE INSTRUMENTS GmbH
Schlesische Str. 29-30
D-10997 Berlin
Germany
www.native-instruments.de
NATIVE INSTRUMENTS North America, Inc.
6725 Sunset Boulevard
5th Floor
Los Angeles, CA 90028
USA
www.native-instruments.com
NATIVE INSTRUMENTS K.K.
YO Building 3F
Jingumae 6-7-15, Shibuya-ku,
Tokyo 150-0001
Japan
www.native-instruments.co.jp
NATIVE INSTRUMENTS UK Limited
18 Phipp Street
London EC2A 4NU
UK
www.native-instruments.com
© NATIVE INSTRUMENTS GmbH, 2014. All rights reserved.
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
1 Welcome to THE GENTLEMAN ....................................................................................5
2 User Interface ...........................................................................................................6
2.1 Tone ............................................................................................................................................ 7
2.2 Anatomy ..................................................................................................................................... 9
2.3 Space ......................................................................................................................................... 13
3 Credits ......................................................................................................................15
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 4
Welcome to THE GENTLEMAN
1 Welcome to THE GENTLEMAN
Thank you for purchasing THE GENTLEMAN, a virtual instrument that replicates a wonderful
vintage Bechstein Model A Upright Piano. Built in 1908 and still equipped with all original
parts, its tone color is as delicate an expressive as it is beautifully modulated. While delivering
a typical upright piano sound, THE GENTLEMAN features an extraordinarily wide dynamic
range with a smooth tonal character over the whole keyboard.
▪ Based on a vintage Bechstein Model A upright piano built in 1908
▪ Over 2300 samples
▪ 16 velocity zones for an extraordinary dynamic range
▪ 9 release samples for each key
▪ Special resonance samples
▪ Halfpedal and Repedal
▪ Color control for easy variation of the timbre
▪ Real overtone samples
▪ Controllable piano noises like pedal, damper, string or hammer noises
▪ Lid Control simulating a virtual lid in two positions
▪ Compressor and Tape Saturation for pop piano sounds
▪ Depth Control for an enhanced resonant character
▪ Transients Control for adding attack or sustain
▪ Based on the Galaxy Pianos engine
▪ 13GB sample content (6GB compressed)
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 5
User Interface
2 User Interface
After loading THE GENTLEMAN you will see the instrument you are playing and the main con-
trols:
THE GENTLEMAN's user interface.
The following sections will describe the user interface of THE GENTLEMAN.
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 6
User Interface
Tone
2.1 Tone
The TONE section gives you control over the tonal character of THE GENTLEMAN. The TONE
section has two main controls, as well as extra advanced controls on the Tone Edit Page, which
is accessed by clicking on the arrow to the top right of the Tone window.
Tone Main Controls
The main TONE controls.
The two main TONE controls are:
▪ COLOR: Changes the tone color or timbre from soft to hard by readjusting the sample
mapping. It’s a dynamic way of mapping, while balancing the volume differences between
softer and harder samples. Turning the COLOR knob to the right will make the instrument
sound harder, crisper, and with more attack; turning it to the left will make the instru-
ment sound warmer, softer and with less attack.
▪ LID: You can alter the basic sound of THE GENTLEMAN by selecting a different lid posi-
tion. Click the button to toggle between the two options: By default the lid is open; this
position provides the most brilliant sound. In the closed position the sound of THE GEN-
TLEMAN will contain a smaller share of high frequencies, and its low end will be softer.
Tone Edit Page Controls
► To open the Edit Page, click the small arrow button to the top right of the window.
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 7
User Interface
Tone
The TONE controls with the edit page open.
▪ EQUALIZER: Three controls for BASS, BODY and AIR, which control the levels of the low,
middle and high frequency bands respectively.
▪ TONAL DEPTH: Adjusts the amount of resonances added to the dry piano sound. These
resonances will add depth to the sound of THE GENTLEMAN .
▪ TRANSIENTS: Adjusts the amount of extra size generated by the TRANSIENT MASTER
effect.
▪ LOW KEYS: Changes the volume of the keys below middle C. The volume of the lower
keys will be increased or decreased depending if the LEVEL knob is set towards MORE or
LESS. The lower the key, the stronger the effect.
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 8
User Interface
Anatomy
▪ COMPRESSOR / TAPE: Here you can control the AMOUNT of compression, as well as se-
lect different compressor characters from the drop-down menu. A compressor, besides
controlling the dynamic range, changes a sound’s envelope and thus the sound itself. THE
GENTLEMAN’s compressor is more of a sound tool than a dynamic tool, which especially
serves well in pop, rock and film-score music contexts.
2.2 Anatomy
Talking about THE GENTLEMAN’s anatomy means talking about its design regarding playabili-
ty and structure. Here you will find control over dynamics, tuning, noises, overtones and the
stereo image.
Like the TONE Section, the ANATOMY section also has an Edit Page with extended controls.
► To open the Edit Page, click the small arrow button to the top right of the window.
Anatomy Main Controls
The ANATOMY controls.
▪ DYNAMIC RANGE: Controls the piano’s dynamic range by adjusting the volume while still
using all velocity samples. Turn left to compress, or turn right to expand the dynamic
range of THE GENTLEMAN .
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 9
User Interface
Anatomy
▪ RESONANCES: Pressing the sustain pedal on a piano raises all the dampers at once, ena-
bling all strings to resonate sympathetically. This adds a much fuller and deeper sound to
the note. The RESONANCES knob adjusts the volume of these string resonances, when
the sustain pedal is down.
▪ The PEDAL indicator light shows when the sustain pedal is down and thus when the reso-
nance samples are in use.
Anatomy Edit Page Controls
The ANATOMY controls with the edit page open.
▪ OVERTONES: Loads and enables overtone samples. After hitting a key, the corresponding
strings may resonate at their fundamental or overtone frequencies when other strings are
triggered. These overtones add liveliness to the sound. This is also known as Sympathetic
String Resonance. The volume of the overtone samples can be set with the LEVEL knob.
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 10
User Interface
Anatomy
▪ STEREO IMAGE: Use the WIDTH knob to widen or narrow the stereo field. The mid posi-
tion corresponds to the stereo width of the original recording; turning the knob to the left
position makes the sound mono, while turning it to the right artificially enhances the ster-
eo width. The samples in THE GENTLEMAN are panned with the low notes on the left and
the high notes on the right, which corresponds to the listening position of the player.
Clicking the SWAP button swaps the left and right channels, changing the listening posi-
tion to that of the audience.
▪ KEYS: the drop-down menu gives you access to key velocity presets for customizing the
velocity response to your keyboard and your way of playing. Clicking SILENT KEY enables
the silent key function: very low key velocities result in no sound.
▪ PEDAL: Clicking REPEDALING enables repedaling — if the sustain pedal is depressed
during note release, the remaining sound sustains. HALFPEDAL: Enables the use of a
continuous sustain pedal for half-pedaling. On a piano you can decide how far the damp-
ers are lifted from the strings by controlling how far down you press the pedal. This af-
fects the release time and the amount of resonance. When the HALFPEDAL button is un-
checked, a continuous sustain pedal is transformed into an on/off switch. (For half-pedal-
ling you need a special continuous sustain pedal, which outputs midi values from 1-127
instead of an on/off command.)
Release Samples
When hitting a key, the damper leaves the string. When releasing the key, the damper comes
down to the string again. The energy generated by a loudly vibrating piano string, especially by
the longer more powerful bass strings, can’t be stopped by the small felt damper right away, so
the sound gradually dies away, which can take some time, especially in the low strings. This is
represented by the release samples.
▪ When REL. SAMPLE is switched on, this loads and uses the recorded release sounds of
THE GENTLEMAN.
▪ The volume of the release samples can be set with the correspondent VOLUME fader.
▪ As the release samples of THE GENTLEMAN are very long (up to 20 seconds) they are
switchable between Short and Long by using the DECAY switch. The Long setting will use
the full original samples, whereas the Short setting will make the instrument more playa-
ble.
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 11
User Interface
Anatomy
▪ If REL. SAMPLE is switched off, with the DECAY switch will change to a fader that con-
trols the release time of amplitude envelope of the dry samples.
The REL. VOLUME slider controls the volume of the release samples.
Noises
In this section you can load or unload four different mechanical noises that occur when playing
a piano. The volume of each noise can be set using the corresponding fader.
▪ HAMMER: Loads and enables hammer noise samples. When releasing a key, the hammer
returns to its resting position, creating mechanical hammer noise hat playz with the re-
lease samples.
▪ DAMPER: Loads and enables damper noise samples. The damper pedal raises all damp-
ers from the strings at once when pressed and drops them back on the strings when re-
leased. Both result in a short damper noise. This feature is dynamically playable with a
continuous sustain pedal.
▪ PEDAL: Loads and enables pedal noise samples. Because the pedals in a grand piano are
such strong mechanisms, they transfer a lot of energy to the whole piano body and the
soundboard, resulting in some low frequency resonance. When using a continuous sustain
pedal, the volume of the pedal, damper and string noises depends on the speed in which
the pedal is pressed.
▪ STRING: Loads and enables string noise samples. When the dampers leave the strings af-
ter pressing the damper pedal, each damper pulls its corresponding string a little bit, re-
sulting in vibration of each string with its resonance frequency.
TUNING
The BASIC PITCH knob lets you select the basic pitch, also often called Concert Pitch, from
436Hz to 444 Hz.
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 12
User Interface
Space
The tuning (or temperment) of the piano can be adjusted by using the switch. It can be set to
either Stretched or Equal. The default tuning is stretched, which is the way the piano was
tuned for sampling. Stretched tuning accommodates the natural ‘inharmonicity’ of metal
strings. This ‘inharmonicity’ stretches harmonics beyond their ideal frequencies. Solving this
dilemma involves some stretching of the higher notes upward and the lower notes downward
from their ideal frequencies. The amount of stretching depends on the length of the string, and
thus the size of the piano.
2.3 Space
The SPACE section refers to THE GENTLEMAN's Convolution Reverb, which uses impulse re-
sponses of real acoustic spaces to simulate the acoustics of those rooms. These impulse re-
sponses (IR’s) are a bit like the room’s acoustic fingerprint, or like recording a sample of a
space. Convolution reverb is unbeatable in quality and realism when it comes to simulating re-
al acoustic spaces like concert halls, churches or studio rooms.
Controls
The Space controls are always located to the right of the instrument's interface.
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 13
User Interface
Space
The SPACE controls.
► To switch the effect on or off, click the button to the top left of this section.
▪ AMOUNT: Controls the amount of signal sent to the reverb unit, and so also the volume of
the reverb signal.
▪ SIZE: Increases or decreases the virtual size of the chosen room type.
▪ DISTANCE: Controls the amount of pre-delay before the reverb starts.
▪ The Impulse Response file is selected from the drop-down menu and arrows at the bottom
of this section.
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 14
Credits
3 Credits
Produced by Uli Baronowsky for GALAXY INSTRUMENTS and NATIVE INSTRUMENTS
Co-Produced by Stephan Lembke
Recorded by Uli Baronowsky and Stephan Lembke
Production Assistance: Ingo Hermes
Product Design: Frank Elting
KSP Programming: Klaus Baetz
User Interface Design: Simon Martin, Efflam Le Bivic
Editing: Ingo Hermes, Marc Bohn, Dominik Honnef, Max Kahlhöfer, Alexander Klatt, Roy Reck-
lies, Boris Smolorz, Stephan Lembke, Uli Baronowsky
Finalization and KSP Support: Thanos Kazakos
Piano Tuner: André Wedel, Hagen Wittenbrock
Artwork: Yvonne Hartmann
Piano Consulting: Mark Joggerst, Sebastian Müller-Schrobsdorff
Reference Keyboard: Kawai VPC1
Website: www.galaxy-instruments.com
Special Thanks: Brigitte Angerhausen, Monika and Lillianna Dömer, Frank Elting, Benno Glü-
senkamp (Fattoria Musica), Tilman Hahn, Dominik Hartmann and Lennart Damann, Michael
Kunz (Kawai Germany), Tobias Menguser, Christian Wachsmuth, Robert Linke and everybody
at NI, Sebastian Müller-Schrobsdorff, Markus Riegler, Christian Schoke & Alexander Fiedeler
(Schoke Pianos), Christian Stader, Markus Born and Dennis Kopacz (Samplepark Studios), An-
nika van der Linden, André Wedel, Hagen Wittenbrock
THE GENTLEMAN - Manual - 15