Manual
Disclaimer
The information in this document is subject to change without notice and does not represent
a commitment on the part of Native Instruments GmbH. The software described by
this document is subject to a License Agreement and may not be copied to other media.
No part of this publication may be copied, reproduced or otherwise transmitted or recorded,
for any purpose, without prior written permission by Native Instruments GmbH, hereinafter
referred to as Native Instruments. All product and company names are ™ or ® trademarks
of their respective owners.
Document authored by: Adam Hanley
Editing by: Christoph Laue, Patryk Korman
Product Version: 1.5 (02/2019)
Document version: 1.0 (06/2010
Special thanks to the Beta Test Team, who were invaluable not just in tracking down bugs,
but in making this a better product.
Contact
Germany
Native Instruments GmbH
Schlesische Str. 28
D-10997 Berlin
Germany
info@native-instruments.de
www.native-instruments.de
USA
Native Instruments North America, Inc.
5631 Hollywood Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90028
USA
sales@native-instruments.com
www.native-instruments.com
© Native Instruments GmbH, 2010. All rights reserved.
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
1 Welcome to VINTAGE ORGANS 6
2 Quick-Start 7
2.1 Navigating the Instruments 7
2.2 Altering the Sound 8
2.3 Keyswitches and Presets 9
2.4 Setting Up for Performance 9
3 About the Organs 11
3.1 The Hammond B3, C3 and M3 11
3.2 The Vox Continental 14
3.3 The Farfisa Compact 14
4 Interface Overview 16
4.1 Organ Page 16
4.1.1 Tonewheel Organs B3 and C3 16
4.1.2 Tonewheel Organ M3 19
4.1.3 The Transistor Continental 20
4.1.4 The Transistor Compact 22
4.2 Amp Page 23
4.2.1 Organ Controls 24
4.2.2 Tube Amplifier 24
4.2.3 Rotor 25
4.2.4 Cabinets 26
4.2.5 Reverb 27
4.3 Settings Page 27
4.3.1 Controller Options 28
4.3.2 Drawbar Options 29
Vintage Organs - Manual - 4
Table of Contents
4.3.3 Manuals 30
5 Credits 31
Vintage Organs - Manual - 5
Welcome to VINTAGE ORGANS
1 Welcome to VINTAGE ORGANS
Thank you very much for purchasing VINTAGE ORGANS. This KONTAKT library adds five
extensively sampled electric organs to your collection. Furthermore, the sounds have been
augmented by powerful performance views, which allow you to easily tweak KONTAKT's
on-board effects and parameters.
This documentation will help you use your new KONTAKT library. The Quick-start contains
a very brief overview of the layout as well as short tutorials for how to perform common
tasks. The successive chapters will give you information about the instruments recorded as
well as a more in-depth look at the controls and features of the library.
On behalf of the entire Native Instruments team, we hope that this product will truly inspire
you.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 6
Quick-Start
2 Quick-Start
2.1 Navigating the Instruments
Each of the instruments provided in this library has three to four pages of controls that allow
you to alter different aspects of the instrument. You can navigate between these pages
by clicking on the tabs at the bottom of the instrument's performance view. The different
pages and their uses are as follows:
1. Model page: Here you can see the model of organ you are playing. There are no controls
on this page (see figure 2.1).
2. Organ page: This is where you control the sound of the organ. It is designed to mirror
the controls of the sampled instrument as authentically as possible (↑4.1, Organ
Page).
3. Amp page: This page contains the controls related to the processing of the organ
sound, with models for amplifiers, cabinets and vintage reverbs (↑4.2, Amp Page).
4. Settings page: On this page you can set up advanced performance options related to
the control of the instrument (↑4.3, Settings Page). This page is not provided for the
Transistor Compact Instruments.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 7
Quick-Start
Altering the Sound
Fig. 2.1 Tonewheel Organ B3 user interface with Model page selected from the Page tabs
2.2 Altering the Sound
The sound altering controls are found on the Amp and Organ pages of all instruments. If
you are looking to alter drawbar settings or the character of the organ in an authentic way,
you can do this on the Organ page. If you are looking to alter the instruments effects, like
EQ and distortion, you can do this on the Amp page.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 8
Quick-Start
Keyswitches and Presets
2.3 Keyswitches and Presets
All of the instruments provided in this library have a selection of twelve organ presets,
which are selectable with either the preset knob or using the C0-B0 octave of keys on a
MIDI keyboard. The keyswitch control method is activated or deactivated using the C0-B0
button.
The organ presets only affect the controls on the Organ page. This is to emulate the preset
control of the original B3 and C3 organs, but has been expanded to control percussion and
vibrato settings for more variation during performance.
It is important to note that the stored organ settings are loaded when the Preset knob is
touched or when the keyswitch is pressed. If you make adjustments to a preset and want to
store them, simply press the Save button and the changes will be stored into the preset slot.
You also need to save the .nki (the KONTAKT instrument file) to make the changes to presets
permanent in the instrument.
2.4 Setting Up for Performance
Since four of the five instruments sampled for this library have two manuals, we have provided
a number of control options which are accessible between the Organ page and Settings
page.
On the Organ page you can select the main mode of control between lower manual only,
key-split, MIDI channel split and upper manual only with the MODE knob. You can even
switch between these settings during a performance, so you can, for example, flip between
the upper and lower manual for different parts of a song while still using the same MIDI
channel and key range.
On the Settings page you can further define this control by selecting the MIDI channels
from which you will play the manuals (if control is set to MIDI SPLIT), or the point at which
the key-split occurs. In order for the MIDI channel split to work, the instrument MIDI
channel must be set to Omni.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 9
Quick-Start
Setting Up for Performance
Setup for Users of Doepfer Organ Controllers
When using the Doepfer d3c controller, it is possible to load a controller preset on the Settings
page that instantly maps the correct MIDI controls on the hardware to the relevant
controls in the software. Simply go to the Controller Preset dropdown on the Settings page
and select Doepfer d3c. All controls will function as expected, except “Keyclick” and
“Perc. Harm.”, which have no function as there is no relevant control in Vintage Organs to
connect them to. The “Body” and “Bright” controls are mapped to the Mid and High EQ
Gain respectively.
If you are using the full Doepfer Organ control system (the d3c and two d3m keyboards)
you can also set up the MIDI split function to further emulate a real organ feel. Simply
select MIDI SPLIT with the MODE knob on the Organ page and set the main instrument MIDI
channel to omni. The default setting is that the upper manual is on MIDI channel 1 and
the lower manual is on MIDI channel 2, which should also be the default setup of the
Doepfer controllers. If this is not the case, just go to the Settings page and select the desired
MIDI channels for your setup.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 10
About the Organs
3 About the Organs
3.1 The Hammond B3, C3 and M3
Arguably the most famous of all electric organ manufacturers, the Hammond organ sound
can be heard in a wide variety of genres, from classic rock to gospel and jazz.
Originally a clock-maker, Laurens Hammond applied his developments in mechanics to try
to reproduce the sound of a church organ. Within every Hammond Organ are a series of
rotating cogs (tonewheels), each with a different number of teeth. As the cogs spin, these
teeth pass by a magnetic pickup and induce an alternating current, which can then be
sent to a speaker to produce sound. Drawbars could then be used to control the mix of
these tones, allowing the player to control the tonality of the organ by mixing harmonics
(See section “Drawbar Theory” below for more information).
The B3 and C3 models were the first Hammond Organs specifically built to contain two
sets of tonewheels to allow for vibrato and chorus sounds. Although different in style (the
C3 being deigned for churches and the B3 for homes, studios and touring), the B3 and C3
were mechanically identical and had the same controls. We have sampled both for this
pack, due to their electro-mechanical nature, as well as general, unique wear and tear that
comes with age, no two Hammond organs will sound perfectly identical, even if they are
the same model. In this case you can listen to the two side by side and decide which has
the character you prefer for your music.
The M3, however, is a different case. Although powered by the same tonewheel technology,
the M3 is a spinet organ, with less keys and less drawbars. Again the character of this
sampled organ is unique, but you will notice some other tonal differences due to the lack
of fold-back in the M3.
Fold-back was used in the B3 and C3 models to compensate for the mechanical restrictions
of the tonewheels. The tonewheels produced at the time could only create tones in a
limited range, so for the higher and lower tones, the octaves wrapped around to fill in the
space left. In the M3 no such wrap around occurs, so the brightness will decrease in the
higher octave and the bass will decrease in the lower octave.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 11
About the Organs
The Hammond B3, C3 and M3
Drawbar Theory
Drawbar organs operate under the same sound generation principals as additive synthesis.
In additive synthesis complex tones are generated by combining sine waves (a waveform
with only one partial) of different frequencies and amplitudes.
For the Hammond organs, the frequencies of these waves follow a pattern based on the
harmonic series. In this series a fundamental frequency acts as the first harmonic, the
second harmonic (or first overtone) is twice the frequency of the fundamental (one octave
above), the third is three times the fundamental (an octave plus a perfect 5th above), and
so on.
The first eight natural harmonics of middle C are:
Fig. 3.1 The first eight harmonics of middle C
The terms used for describing the harmonic content of organs historically comes from pipe
organs, where the use of various lengths of pipe determines the tonal characteristics (so a
pipe of half the length of another would produce a tone at twice the frequency). Hence,
organs have come to use “pipe length” rather than harmonic number to describe sound
settings.
On the tonewheel organ, the brown drawbars provide tones that are not natural harmonics
of the fundamental frequency, but belong to the harmonic series starting one octave below.
That’s why they are often called sub-harmonics.
The “pipe length” settings, and their relationship to the natural harmonics, are illustrated
below:
Vintage Organs - Manual - 12
About the Organs
The Hammond B3, C3 and M3
Fig. 3.2 Drawbars and their Harmonics
As we can see in the illustration, drawbars also have a series of numbers marked along
each bar. These numbers show the amplitude of each harmonic (the second important part
of additive synthesis). In the Hammond organs we have sampled and emulated, the drawbars
have nine discreet volume settings from 0 (off) to 8. It is common practice, when
writing for drawbar organs, to notate the drawbar settings with a series of numbers representing
the volume level of each drawbar, in the format 88-8888-888 (this example would
be all of the bars at full volume).
Vintage Organs - Manual - 13
About the Organs
The Vox Continental
3.2 The Vox Continental
Introduced in 1962, the Continental was one of the first and remains one of the most famous
combo organs. It was designed originally as a low-cost, low-weight touring alternative
for the larger Hammond organs, but had a unique character that was popularized by 60s
pop acts such as The Doors, The Monkees and The Animals.
The original Vox Continental had one manual, six drawbars and a vibrato on/off switch,
though later models would contain additional manuals and percussion controls. For this library
we have sampled a Vox Continental II, with two manuals and no percussion.
The sound of the Continental (and most other combo organs) was not produced in any
electro-mechanical way, like with the Hammond tonewheel organs, but with transistor
based circuitry. This not only decreased the size and weight, but altered the characteristics
of the sound produced. The tone generation of these combo organs were produced by
filtering a square wave, with each key having its own oscillator and filter circuitry.
The drawbars of the continental work differently from those of the tonewheel organs. Four
of the six drawbars control the harmonics 16', 8', 4', IV (with IV representing a mixture of
the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 8th harmonics). The remaining two drawbars, labelled ~ and M, control
the different timbres for the harmonics. The two tone types you have control over are
flute (a sine wave) and reed (with a more buzzy character, somewhere between a triangle
or square wave) respectively.
The Vox Continental II offered one extra drawbar for the upper manual to better control the
higher harmonics, the lower manual kept the standard six drawbars. So if you desire the
original, single-manual continental sound, it is recommended to use the lower manual only
in your setup.
3.3 The Farfisa Compact
Italian Accordion manufacturer Farfisa released their fist combo organ in 1964, after the
success of the Vox Continental. It was used by many as a cheap alternative to the Continental,
but has also made appearances in recordings by high profile artists such as Pink
Floyd, Elton John and Led Zeppelin.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 14
About the Organs
The Farfisa Compact
The Compact series differs from the other organs in this pack in that it has no drawbars;
all of the timbre and tonal control is done via switches.
Like the original Continental, the Farfisa Compact only has one manual, but, unlike other
organs, the lowest octave of the manual was designed to produce its own tone, to mimic
the pedals of a larger organ. The bass octave had no tonal controls, only volume switches.
Many variations of the Compact were made, but for this library we have sampled an original
standard model. This model contained a tube pre-amp to drive an internal spring reverb
unit. The reverb settings were controlled with two switches that sat beside the three
vibrato control switches. The Compact is also the only single manual organ sampled for
this library.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 15
Interface Overview
4 Interface Overview
4.1 Organ Page
The Organ page is where you can find all of the controls found on the original organs we
have sampled. Here you can control the drawbars and other sound controls. This page differs
from organ to organ. See the following sub-chapters for a description of the individual
organs' Organ pages.
4.1.1 Tonewheel Organs B3 and C3
The B3 and C3 share the same Organ page controls.
Fig. 4.1 The Organ page for the B3
▪ Along the top you will find the drawbars. These control the volume levels of their respective
tonewheels (see section “Drawbar Theory” in chapter ↑3.1, The Hammond
B3, C3 and M3 for more information). If Mute Inactive on the Settings page is turned
Vintage Organs - Manual - 16
Interface Overview
Organ Page
on, the drawbars will not work in real-time when going from a value of 0 (off) to another
value. However, they will work in real-time in all cases when the drawbar is
starting from any value other than 0.
▪ To the bottom left of the page is the Rotator switch, which controls the rotator speed.
The Rotator effect emulates the sound and control of a Leslie speaker and has two
states: Fast and Slow. By default, this switch can also be controlled by the modwheel.
Additional Rotator controls can be found on the Amp page. This control will not
change the sound if the Rotator effect is turned off.
Fig. 4.2 The lower section of controls.
▪ In the Vibrato section of the page, the VIBRATO LOWER and VIBRATO UPPER switches activate
or deactivate the vibrato for their respective manuals and the V-C selector sets up
the depth and style of vibrato for both. Turning on vibrato for the lower manual also
activates vibrato for the pedal sounds as well. The numeric values of the V-C knob represent
the depth of the pitch modulation and the letters V and C stand for Vibrato and
Chorus, respectively. Vibrato settings mean that you only get the pitch modulated signal
and Chorus settings give you this signal mixed with a steady tone, producing an
ensemble type effect. The vibrato controls are affected in a similar way to the drawbars
if MUTE INACTIVE DRAWBARS from the Drawbar options section in the Settings page
(↑4.3.2, Drawbar Options) is turned on.
▪ The PRESETS knob selects and loads twelve different presets for the organ controls (this
includes all drawbars as well as the Vibrato and Percussion controls). The C0–B0 button
activates the keyswitch control of this knob. If you make changes to a preset and
want to store this into the knob, just press the save button after you have finished editing.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 17
Interface Overview
Organ Page
Note that the .nki (the KONTAKT instrument file) will also need to be saved to make these
changes permanent for the next time you open the instrument.
▪ The Percussion switches for the B3, C3 and M3 effect only the upper manual, as was
the case with the original organs. When active, the percussion adds a monophonic envelope
either to the 2nd or 3rd harmonic, depending on the setting of the PERCUS HARMON
(Percussion Harmonic) switch on the right. The depth and speed of the envelope
are controlled by the PERCUS VOLUME (Percussion Volume) and PERCUS DECAY (Percussion
Decay) switches. In the real B3 and C3, the percussion would deactivate the highest
(1') drawbar. You have the option of enabling this behavior in the Settings page.
▪ The MODE selector lets you specify how you play the instrument. Setting it to LOWER or
UPPER will make your MIDI keyboard or sequencer control only the Lower or Upper
manual. MIDI SPLIT allows you to use different MIDI channels to play the two manuals
(you can specify the channels in the Settings page). KEY SPLIT sends the notes below
the split key to the lower manual and notes including or above the split key to the upper
manual.
▪ The final control is the SWELL slider. This is designed to mimic the volume/expression
pedal of the original B3 and C3. It is hard-wired to MIDI controller 11.
Fig. 4.3 Pedal Bass controls for the C3
If you select the Pedal view using the PEDAL button to the left of the drawbars, you will see
the PEDAL BASS controls replacing the drawbars for the lower manual. There are two drawbars
that control the harmonics of the pedal bass sound. The DIRECT button allows you to
Vintage Organs - Manual - 18
Interface Overview
Organ Page
route the pedal bass so that it can bypass the effects of the instrument. You can specify
which of KONTAKT's outputs it will be routed to from the dropdown menu to the right of
the button.
The SUSTAIN knob adjusts the decay time of the pedal bass and, when set to any value other
than 0, will make the bass monophonic.
4.1.2 Tonewheel Organ M3
The M3 Organ page is similar in many ways to the B3 and C3 pages, but with two main
differences: the lower manual drawbars and the lack of pedal controls.
Fig. 4.4 The lower manual drawbar controls for the M3
The lower manual for the M3 has only eight drawbar controls, but still these controls manage
the amplitude of nine tonewheels. This is because the highest drawbar (labelled II) actually
controls the amplitude of the two highest harmonics.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 19
Interface Overview
Organ Page
4.1.3 The Transistor Continental
Fig. 4.5 The Organ page of the Transistor Continental
The top portion of the Transistor Continental's Organ page is where you find the drawbars,
which control the tonality and timbre of the two manuals. The dark drawbars control the
main volume levels of the two oscillator types, with ~ controlling a sine wave type sound
(flute) and M controlling a more buzzy sound (reed). The harmonics for both of these oscillator
shapes are controlled with the lighter drawbars.
If MUTE INACTIVE DRAWBARS on the Settings page is turned on (see ↑4.3, Settings Page and
↑4.3.2, Drawbar Options), the drawbars will not work in real-time when going from a value
of 0 (off) to another value. However, they will work in real-time in all cases when the drawbar
is starting from any value other than 0.
Like the original Vox Continental models, this instrument has only one VIBRATO ON/OFF
switch (0/1). Beside this is the BASS Volume knob, which controls the volume of the lower
octave of the instrument (this octave is not connected to any drawbars, vibrato or envelope
controls).
Vintage Organs - Manual - 20
Interface Overview
Organ Page
The PRESETS knob selects and loads twelve different presets for the organ controls, which
includes all drawbars as well as the vibrato controls). The C0–B0 button activates keyswitch
control of this knob. If you make changes to a preset and want to store this into the knob,
just press the save button after you have finished editing (please note that the nki will also
need saved to make these changes permanent for the next time you open the instrument).
The MODE selector knob lets you specify how you play the instrument. Setting it to LOWER or
UPPER will make your MIDI keyboard or sequencer control only the Lower or Upper manual
respectively. MIDI SPLIT allows you to use different MIDI channels to play the two manuals
(you can specify the channels in the Settings page, see ↑4.3, Settings Page). KEY SPLIT
sends the notes below the split key to the lower manual and notes including or above the
split key to the upper manual.
The final control is the swell slider. This is designed to mimic a volume/expression pedal.
It is hard-wired to MIDI controller 11.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 21
Interface Overview
Organ Page
4.1.4 The Transistor Compact
Fig. 4.6 The Transistor Compact Organ controls.
The Farfisa Compact is unique in this library in that it has no drawbar controls, almost all
of the organ parameters are controlled by switches. However, like the other organs, the top
row of controls effects different harmonics and sounds produced by the instrument.
Fig. 4.7 The voice control switches
Vintage Organs - Manual - 22
Interface Overview
Amp Page
The most important switch of the voice controls is the MULTI-TONE BOOSTER. When this is set
to ON, the green switches to the left become active, if it is set to OFF, the grey switches to
the right become active. The grey switches are basic in operation and simply activate or
deactivate certain sounds for the three different harmonics. The green, multi-tone controls
work in a slightly different manner. The three controls labelled 16, 8, and 4 activate (or deactivate
respectively) the different harmonics. The fourth switch, ALL BOOSTER, opens/closes
the filter on these harmonics. Because of the nature of this operation, turning the ALL BOOSTER
on or off can cause a change in volume as well as spectrum.
Again, the Mute Inactive function works for this organ as it does with the other organs.
For the Vibrato there are three switches: one for speed (SLOW or FAST), one for depth (LIGHT
or HEAVY) and one ON/OFF switch.
Beside the VIBRATO controls are the REVERB controls. Here you can select the length of the
reverb (MEDium or LONG) and activate or deactivate it using the ON/OFF switch. Further reverb
controls can be found on the Amp page for fine tuning of the sound. Note that the reverb
length controls on the Organ and Amp pages are linked.
The BASS knob controls the volume of the lowest octave of notes. This octave is unaffected
by the top row of switches.
The PRESETS knob selects and loads twelve different presets for the organ controls (this includes
all switches as well as the Bass volume). The C0–B0 button activates keyswitch control
of this knob. If you make changes to a preset and want to store this into the knob, just
press the save button after you have finished editing.
Please note that the .nki will also need to be saved to make these changes permanent for the
next time you open the instrument.
The final control is the SWELL slider. This is designed to mimic a volume/expression pedal.
It is hard-wired to MIDI controller 11.
4.2 Amp Page
On the Amp page you can find all of the controls related to the processing of the organ
sound.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 23
Interface Overview
Amp Page
4.2.1 Organ Controls
Fig. 4.8 The Organ Controls
The Organ Controls give you options that were not available on the original organ models,
but are standard in most virtual instruments. With the VELOCITY control you can specify the
velocity sensitivity of the instrument. The ATTACK and RELEASE knobs alter the attack and release
times of the volume envelope respectively. In the first 10-20% of the control, the
ATTACK and RELEASE reduce the volume of the key-click sound of the organ without adding
too much of a fade in or out. This can be nice to soften the sound of the organ without
changing the envelope completely.
4.2.2 Tube Amplifier
Fig. 4.9 The Tube Amplifier Controls
The TUBE AMPLIFIER section gives you a selection of controls you would expect to find on an
instrument pre-amp or amp head.
The first row of controls let you shape the overdrive emulation.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 24
Interface Overview
Amp Page
▪ The VINTAGE/MODERN switch allows you to select between a modern or vintage overdrive
style, with modern being a heavier, more distorted character, and the vintage being a
mellow, saturation overdrive.
▪ The DRIVE knob then controls the overdrive amount
▪ The TONE knob alters the tonal character of the drive. Turning the TONE knob to the
right increases high frequency distortion and lowers the low frequencies, turning it to
the left increases the low end, but decreases the high end. A central setting is neutral.
▪ For better control over the tonal character, there is also a fixed 3-band EQ (BASS, MID,
TREBLE), which allows you to increase or decrease the gain of the low, mid and high
frequencies.
4.2.3 Rotor
Fig. 4.10 The Rotor controls of the Vox and Farfisa
The ROTOR effect comes after the TUBE AMPLIFIER and simulates the rotary effect of the Leslie
speaker. These are advanced controls that are normally not available on a real Leslie cabinet.
▪ On the Vox and Farfisa instruments, the rotor speed switch is available here (FAST/
SLOW). It works in the same way as the ROTATOR control on the B3, C3 and M3 Organ
pages.
▪ For all organ models there is an ON/OFF switch, acceleration control for both the top
(treble) and low (bass) speakers (the acceleration defines the rate at which the rotor
goes from its slow setting to the fast setting, or vice versa, when the Speed switch
state is changed).
Vintage Organs - Manual - 25
Interface Overview
Amp Page
▪ The BALANCE knob then sets the volume balance between the high and low speakers.
When the control is all the way to the left, only the bass speaker is heard, when it is
set to the far right, only the high speaker is heard, and a middle setting is a 50/50
mix of the two.
4.2.4 Cabinets
Fig. 4.11 The Cabinet Controls
The CABINET area allows you to select from a collection of modeled cabinets. Setting the
cabinet to D.I. bypasses the cabinet effect, giving you the clean signal from the Amplifier
and Rotor.
The AIR control adds a simulated distance between the microphones and the cabinet.
Note that the AIR control will not have any effect if the cabinet is set to D.I..
Vintage Organs - Manual - 26
Interface Overview
Settings Page
4.2.5 Reverb
Fig. 4.12 The Reverb Controls
In this area you can control the reverb settings of the instrument. The reverbs used in the
Vintage Organs library are impulse responses taken from real vintage equipment: a large
plate and a spring.
▪ The reverb type (PLATE/SPRING) and size (LONG/SHORT) are selected with two switches (in
the Farfisa instruments the size selector switch is duplicated on the main Organ
page).
▪ The AMOUNT control sets the volume level of the effect signal.
4.3 Settings Page
The Settings page for the organs contains advanced controls for setting up control of the
instruments.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 27
Interface Overview
Settings Page
4.3.1 Controller Options
Fig. 4.13 B3, C3 and M3 Controller Options
In this area you can specify how the MIDI controllers interact with the instrument.
MIDI controller 11 is hard-wired to the swell control.
The MOD WHEEL, SUSTAIN PEDAL and AFTERTOUCH can be routed to various destinations selected
from their respective drop-down menus.
The PITCHBEND WHEEL drop-down, which is only available on the Tonewheel organs, has two
unique options for how it interacts with the instruments:
▪ Selecting Rotor Speed allows you to switch the rotor speed when you move the pitchbend
control to either apex. Unlike the sustain pedal, aftertouch and modwheel, moving
the pitchbend acts as a toggle, so when you release it and let it return to the central
value, the rotor speed remains at whichever rate you last selected. This can be a
nice option to use if your MIDI controller has a spring-loaded modwheel.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 28
Interface Overview
Settings Page
▪ Selecting Adjust Drawbars means that the pitchbend control will affect the amplitude
of all active drawbars. Sending positive pitchbend values will increase the amplitude
of the active drawbars and sending negative values will decrease the amplitude of the
active drawbars. This can act as a nice expressive tonal or amplitude modulator.
There are also preset controller setups available if you own a dedicated organ controller
like Native Instruments discontinued B4D or the Doepfer d3c. These controller setups will
not affect the other controller options you have selected (see chapter ↑2.4, Setting Up for
Performance for more information).
4.3.2 Drawbar Options
Fig. 4.14 Drawbar Options for the B3, C3 and M3
For the B3, C3 and M3, the drawbar options are the same.
▪ Here you have the option to make the percussion polyphonic (which is not the case in
the original instruments).
▪ You can also change the behavior of the interaction between the percussion and the
highest (1') drawbar. In the original organs the percussion would deactivate the top
drawbar, but here you have the option to deactivate this behavior.
▪ A Mute Inactive control is available on all organs (though in the Farfisa instruments it
is positioned on the Organ page). This control, when active, deactivates the playback
of samples that have their drawbars set to 0. The advantage of this is that it reduces
the strain on your computer's hard disc; the disadvantage is that some real-time control
over the drawbars is not available while playing.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 29
Interface Overview
Settings Page
4.3.3 Manuals
Fig. 4.15 Manual settings for the B3 and C3
The MANUALS area of the Settings page is for specifying the options of the MODE knob from
the Organ page of the instruments with more than one manual.
If the MODE is set to KEY SPLIT, then this key is specified here. Any note above or including
this note will play the upper manual, any note below this one will play the lower manual.
If MODE is set to MIDI SPLIT, then the MIDI channels of the different manuals can be set
here. Please make sure that the main instrument MIDI channel is set to omni before using
the MIDI split options.
Vintage Organs - Manual - 30
Credits
5 Credits
Product Design: Nikolas Jeroma
Sound Design: Jojo Büld, Nikolas Jeroma
Graphic Design: Efflam Le Bivic, Gösta Wellmer
KSP Programming: Nikolas Jeroma, Adam Hanley
Documentation: Adam Hanley
All samples recorded by Native Instruments
Vintage Organs - Manual - 31